- Council of the
European Union

Brussels, 11 June 2015

 

 

 

 

 

(OR. en)
9788/15
Interinstitutional File:
2012/0011 (COD)
DATAPROTECT 102
JAI 439
MI 395
DIGIT 51
DAPIX 98
FREMP 136
COMIX 272
CODEC 865
OUTCOME OF PROCEEDINGS
From: General Secretariat of the Council
To: Delegations
No. prev. doc.: 9657/15
Subject: Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council

on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection
Regulation)

- Preparation of a general approach

 

In annex appears a consolidated version of the General Data Protection Regulation as it stands after

the Coreper meeting on 9 June 2015.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 1
DGDZC EN

ANNEX

Proposal for a
REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the

free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation)

(Text with EEA relevance)

THE EUROPEAN PARLLAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article

16(2) (. . .) thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national Parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committeel,
After consulting the European Data Protection Supervisorz,

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,

 

 

OJ C, p. . .
2 OJ C p. .
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 2

ANNEX DGDZC EN

Whereas:

1)

2)

3)

3a)

The protection of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data is a
fundamental right. Article 8(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
and Article 16(1) of the Treaty lay down that everyone has the right to the protection of

personal data concerning him or her.

The (. . .) principles and rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
their personal data should, whatever the nationality or residence of natural persons, respect
their fundamental rights and freedoms, notably their right to the protection of personal data. It
should contribute to the accomplishment of an area of freedom, security and justice and of an
economic union, to economic and social progress, the strengthening and the convergence of

the economies within the internal market, and the well-being of individuals.

Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data3 seeks to harmonise the protection of fundamental rights and
freedoms of natural persons in respect of processing activities and to guarantee the free ﬂow

of personal data between Member States.

The right to the protection of personal data is not an absolute right: it must be considered in

 

relation to its function in society and be balanced with other fundamental rights. in accordance

 

with the principle of proportionality. This Regulation respects all fundamental rights and

 

observes the principles recognised in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European

 

Union as enshrined in the Treaties. notably the right to respect for private and family life.

 

home and communications. the right to the protection of personal data. the freedom of

 

thought. conscience and religion. the freedom of expression and information. the freedom to

 

conduct a business. the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial as well as cultural.

 

religious and linguistic diversity.

 

 

OJL281, 23.11.1995, p. 31.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 3
ANNEX DGD2C EN

4) The economic and social integration resulting from the functioning of the internal market has
led to a substantial increase in cross-border ﬂows. The exchange of data between (. . .) public

and private actors. including individuals and undertakings across the Union has increased.

 

National authorities in the Member States are being called upon by Union law to co-operate
and exchange personal data so as to be able to perform their duties or carry out tasks on behalf

of an authority in another Member State.

5) Rapid technological developments and globalisation have brought new challenges for the
protection of personal data. The scale of data sharing and collecting has increased
spectacularly. Technology allows both private companies and public authorities to make use
of personal data on an unprecedented scale in order to pursue their activities. Individuals
increasingly make personal information available publicly and globally. Technology has
transformed both the economy and social life, and should further facilitate the free ﬂow of
data within the Union and the transfer to third countries and international organisations, while

ensuring a high level of the protection of personal data.

6) These developments require (. . .) a strong and more coherent data protection framework in the
Union, backed by strong enforcement, given the importance of creating the trust that will
allow the digital economy to develop across the internal market. Individuals should have
control of their own personal data and legal and practical certainty for individuals, economic

operators and public authorities should be reinforced.4

6_a) Where this Regulation provides for specifications or restrictions of its rules by Member State

 

law. Member States may. as far as necessary for the coherence and for making the national

 

provisions comprehensible to the persons to whom they apply. incorporate elements of the

 

Regulation in their respective national law.

 

 

DE proposal to add such wording to recital “As far as the General Data Protection Regulation
provides for legislative measures of the Member States for specifications (6. g. Article. 1
paragraph 2a, Article 6 paragraph 3, Article 83) and restrictions (6. g. Article 21) the Member
States may, in their national law, repeat the wording of the various rights and provisions under
the General Data Protection Regulation if the national legislators find this to be necessary in
the interest of those the rules apply to.”

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 4
ANNEX DGD2C EN

7) The objectives and principles of Directive 95/46/EC remain sound, but it has not prevented
fragmentation in the way data protection is implemented across the Union, legal uncertainty
and a widespread public perception that there are significant risks for the protection of
individuals associated notably with online activity. Differences in the level of protection of
the rights and freedoms of individuals, notably to the right to the protection of personal data,
with regard to the processing of personal data afforded in the Member States may prevent the
free ﬂow of personal data throughout the Union. These differences may therefore constitute
an obstacle to the pursuit of economic activities at the level of the Union, distort competition
and impede authorities in the discharge of their responsibilities under Union law. This
difference in levels of protection is due to the existence of differences in the implementation

and application of Directive 95/46/EC.

8) In order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of individuals and to remove the
obstacles to ﬂows of personal data within the Union, the level of protection of the rights and
freedoms of individuals with regard to the processing of such data should be equivalent in all
Member States. Consistent and homogenous application of the rules for the protection of the
fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal

data should be ensured throughout the Union. Regarding the processing of personal data for

 

compliance with a legal obligation.5 for the performance of a task carried out in the public

 

interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller. Member States should

 

be allowed to maintain or introduce national provisions to further specify the application of

 

the rules of this Regulation. In coniunction with the general and horizontal law on data

 

protection implementing Directive 95/46/EC Member States have several sector speciﬁc laws

 

in areas that need more speciﬁc provisions. This Regulation also provides a margin of

 

manoeuvre for Member States to specify its rules. Within this margin of manoeuvre sector-

 

speciflc laws that Member States have issued implementing Directive 95/46/EC should be

 

able to be upheld.

 

AT, supported by SI, made a proposal for a separate Article 82b which would allow Member
States to adopt specific private sector provisions for specific situations (15768/ 14
DATAPROTECT 176 JAI 908 MI 916 DRS 156 DAPIX 179 FREMP 215 COMIX 623
CODEC 2300). The Presidency thinks that the revised recital 8 read together with Article
1(2a) sufficiently caters for this concern.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 5
ANNEX DGD2C EN

9) Effective protection of personal data throughout the Union requires strengthening and
detailing the rights of data subjects and the obligations of those who process and determine
the processing of personal data, but also equivalent powers for monitoring and ensuring
compliance with the rules for the protection of personal data and equivalent sanctions for

offenders in the Member States.

10) Article 16(2) of the Treaty mandates the European Parliament and the Council to lay down the
rules relating to the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data

and the rules relating to the free movement of personal data.

11) 6In order to ensure a consistent level of protection for individuals throughout the Union and to
prevent divergences hampering the free movement of data within the internal market, a
Regulation is necessary to provide legal certainty and transparency for economic operators,
including micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and to provide individuals in all
Member States with the same level of legally enforceable rights and obligations and
responsibilities for controllers and processors (. . .), to ensure consistent monitoring of the
processing of personal data, and equivalent sanctions in all Member States as well as effective
co-operation by the supervisory authorities of different Member States. The proper
functioning of the internal market requires that the free movement of personal data within the
Union should not be restricted or prohibited for reasons connected with the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data. (. . .)

To take account of the speciﬁc situation of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, this
Regulation includes a number of derogations. In addition, the Union institutions and bodies,
Member States and their supervisory authorities are encouraged to take account of the speciﬁc
needs of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises in the application of this Regulation. The
notion of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises should draw upon Commission
Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the deﬁnition of micro, small and

medium-sized enterprises.

 

SI: reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 6
ANNEX DGD2C EN

12) The protection afforded by this Regulation concerns natural persons, whatever their

nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of personal data. With regard to
the processing of data which concern legal persons and in particular undertakings established
as legal persons, including the name and the form of the legal person and the contact details of

the legal person, the protection of this Regulation should not be claimed by any such person.

(...).

13) The protection of individuals should be technologically neutral and not depend on the

techniques used; otherwise this would create a serious risk of circumvention. The protection
of individuals should apply to processing of personal data by automated means as well as to
manual processing, if the data are contained or are intended to be contained in a ﬁling system.
Files or sets of ﬁles as well as their cover pages, which are not structured according to

speciﬁc criteria, should not fall within the scope of this Regulation.

14) This Regulation does not address issues of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms or

the free ﬂow of data related to activities which fall outside the scope of Union law, such as
activities concerning national security. (. . .) nor does it cover the processing of personal data
by the Member States when carrying out activities in relation to the common foreign and

security policy of the Union. 7

14a)8 Regulation (EC) No 45/20019 applies to the processing of personal data by the Union

institutions. bodies. ofﬁces and agencies“. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union
legal instruments applicable to such processing of personal data should be adapted to the

principles and rules of this Regulation.

 

10

NL prefers not to have speciﬁc references to provisions in the Treaty.

BE, supported by DE and IE, suggested to delete recital (14a).

PL expressed support for the EP amendment on recital(14) of the Commission proposal.
CZ proposes that recital 14a includes explicit reference to the already stated intention of the
Commission to propose an overhaul of Regulation 45/2001/EC to harmonize it with this
Regulation in time for it to enter into force at the same moment. It could be said then that
while the updated Regulation 45/2001/EC will provide for the same level of data protection,
it will be tailored better to the speciﬁcities of EU institutions.

Cion referred to its statement made at the JHA Council in June 2013 in which it has
indicated its intention to align Regulation 45/2001 after agreement on the GDPR.

OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1.

FR, SI: scrutiny reservation about applicable rules for EU agencies.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 7
ANNEX DGD2C EN

15) This Regulation should not apply to processing of personal data by a natural person11 m
course of a personal or household activity, and thus without a connection with a professional
or commercial activity. Personal and household activities include social networking and on-
line activity undertaken within the context of such personal and household activities.2
However. this Regulation should (. . .) apply to controllers or processors which provide the

means for processing personal data for such personal or domestic activities.

16) The protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by competent
authorities for the purposes of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal
offences1 the execution of criminal penalties or the safeguarding against and the prevention of
threats to public security”. and the free movement of such data, is subject of a speciﬁc legal

instrument at Union level.

 

11

12 SK suggested to insert "exclusively"

DE queried whether it should be clariﬁed in the regulation whether the household exemption
of Article 2(2)(e) applies regardless of the number of data subjects affected. In this context,
ES and IT referred to the discussions in the Article 29 working group. BE reacted that the
rules of the GDPR are too complicated for individual persons. IE, UK expressed doubts
about trying to specify the household exemption.

Cion reservation.

The exact wording of the recital and of Article 2(2)(e) will need to be aligned to that of the
data protection Directive still under discussion.

13

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 8
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Therefore, this Regulation should not apply to the processing activities for those purposes.
However, data processed by public authorities under this Regulation when used for the
purposes of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the
execution of criminal penalties should be governed by the more speciﬁc legal instrument at

Union level (Directive XX/YYY). Member States may entrust competent authorities within

 

the meaning of Directive XX/YY Y with other tasks which are not necessarily carried out for
the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences g
the safeguarding against and prevention of threats to public security. so that the processing of
personal data for those other purposes. in so far as it is within the scope of Union law. falls

within the scope of the this Regulation.

With regard to the processing of personal data by those competent authorities for purposes
falling within scope of the General Data Protection Regulation. Member States may maintain
or introduce more speciﬁc provisions to adapt the application of the rules of the General Data
Protection Regulation. Such provisions may determine more precisely speciﬁc requirements
for processing of personal data by those competent authorities for those other purposes. taking
into account the constitutional. organisational and administrative structure of the respective
Member State.

When processing of personal data by (...) private m falls within the scope of this
Regulation, this Regulation should provide for the possibility for Member States under
speciﬁc conditions to restrict by law certain obligations and rights when such a restriction
constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard
speciﬁc important interests including public security and the prevention, investigation,
detection and prosecution of criminal offences. This is relevant for instance in the framework

of anti-money laundering or the activities of forensic laboratories.14

 

 

14 DE, supported by BE and SI, wanted to see the whole of recital 11a from the Police

Directive included in recital 16.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 9
ANNEX DGD2C EN

ﬂ) While this Regulation applies also to the activities of courts and other iudicial authorities.
Union or Member State law could specify the processing operations and processing
procedures in relation to the processing of personal data by courts and other iudicial
authorities. The competence of the supervisory authorities should not cover the processing of
personal data when courts are acting in their judicial capacity. in order to safeguard the
independence of the iudiciary in the performance of its iudicial tasks. including its decision-
making. Supervision of such data processing operations may be entrusted to speciﬁc bodies
within the iudicial system of the Member State. which should in particular control compliance
with the rules of this Regulation. promote the awareness of the iudiciary of their obligations

under this Regulation and deal with complaints in relation to such processing.

17) Directive 2000/31/EC does not apply to questions relating to information society services
covered by this Regulation. That Directive seeks to contribute to the proper functioning of the
internal market by ensuring the free movement of information society services between
Member States. Its application should not be affected by this Regulation. This Regulation
should therefore be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC, in particular

of the liability rules of intermediary service providers in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive.

18) (...)

19) Any processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a
controller or a processor in the Union should be carried out in accordance with this
Regulation, regardless of whether the processing itself takes place within the Union or not.
Establishment implies the effective and real exercise of activity through stable arrangements.
The legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a subsidiary with a legal

personality, is not the determining factor in this respect.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 10
ANNEX DGD2C EN

20)

21)

22)

In order to ensure that individuals are not deprived of the protection to which they are entitled
under this Regulation, the processing of personal data of data subjects residing in the Union
by a controller not established in the Union should be subject to this Regulation where the
processing activities are related to the offering of goods or services to such data subjects
irrespective of whether connected to a payment or not. which takes place in the Union. In
order to determine whether such a controller is offering goods or services to such data
subiects in the Union. it should be ascertained whether it is apparent that the controller is
envisaging doing business with data subiects residing in one or more Member States in the
Union. Whereas the mere accessibility of the controller’s or an intermediary’s website in the
Union or of an email address and of other contact details or the use of a language generally
used in the third country where the controller is established. is insufﬁcient to ascertain such
intention. factors such as the use of a language or a currency generally used in one or more
Member States with the possibility of ordering goods and services in that other language.
and/or the mentioning of customers or users residing in the Union. may make it apparent that

the controller envisages offering goods or services to such data subiects in the Union.

The processing of personal data of data subiects residing in the Union by a controller not
established in the Union should also be subiect to this Regulation when it is related to the

monitoring of their behaviour taking place within the European Union. In order to determine

 

whether a processing activity can be considered to ‘monitor the behaviour’ of data subjects, it
should be ascertained whether individuals are tracked on the intemet with data processing
techniques which consist of proﬁling an individual, particularly in order to take decisions
concerning her or him or for analysing or predicting her or his personal preferences,

behaviours and attitudes.

Where the national law of a Member State applies by virtue of public international law, this
Regulation should also apply to a controller not established in the Union, such as in a Member

State's diplomatic mission or consular post.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 11
ANNEX DGD2C EN

23) The principles of data protection should apply to any information concerning an identiﬁed or
identiﬁable natural person. Data including pseudonymised data. which could be attributed to a
natural person by the use of additional information. should be considered as information on an

identiﬁable natural person. To determine whether a person is identiﬁable, account should be

 

taken of all the means reasonably likely to be used either by the controller or by any other
person to identify the individual directly or indirectly. To ascertain whether means are
reasonably likely to be used to identify the individual. account should be taken of all obiective
factors. such as the costs of and the amount of time required for identiﬁcation. taking into
consideration both available technology at the time of the processing and technological
development. The principles of data protection should therefore not apply to anonymous
information. that is information which does not relate to an identiﬁed or identiﬁable natural
person or to data rendered anonymous in such a way that the data subject is N no longer
identiﬁable. This Regulation does therefore not concern the processing of such anonymous

. . . . . . 15
information. 1nclud1ng for stat1stlcal and research purposes. _.

23 aa) The principles of data protection should not apply to data of deceased persons. The national

law of a Member State may provide for rules regarding the processing of data of deceased

persons.

23a) The application of pseudonymisation to personal data can reduce the risks for the data
subiects concerned and help controllers and processors meet their data protection obligations.
The explicit introduction of ‘pseudonymisation’ through the articles of this Regulation is thus

not intended to preclude any other measures of data protection.

23b) (...)

 

15 The question of the application of the Regulation to deceased persons may need to be

revisited in the future.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 12
ANNEX DGD2C EN

23 c) In order to create incentives for applying pseudonymisation when processing personal data.
measures of pseudonymisation whilst allowing general analysis should be possible within the
same controller when the controller has taken technical and organisational measures necessary
to ensure that the provisions of this Regulation are implemented. taking into account the
respective data processing and ensuring that additional information for attributing the personal
data to a speciﬁc data subiect is kept separately. The controller who processes the data shall
also refer to authorised persons within the same controller. In such case however the
controller shall make sure that the individual( s) performing the pseudonymisation are not

referenced in the meta-data”.

24) When using online services, individuals may be associated with online identiﬁers provided by
their devices, applications, tools and protocols, such as Internet Protocol addresses or cookie
identiﬁers. This may leave traces which, m combined with unique identiﬁers and other
information received by the servers, may be used to create proﬁles of the individuals and
identify them. Identiﬁcation numbers, location data, online identiﬁers or other speciﬁc factors

as such should not (. . .) be considered as personal data if they do not identify an individual or

 

make an individual identiﬁable”.

 

16 COM, IE, IT, AT, SE, UK reservation and FR scrutiny reservation on two last sentences.

DE reservation. AT and SI thought the last sentence of the recital should be deleted.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 13
ANNEX DGD2C EN

25)

Consent should be given unambiguously by any appropriate method enabling a freely-given.

 

speciﬁc and informed indication of the data subiect's wishes. either by a written. includingE

 

electronic. oral statement or. if required by speciﬁc circumstances. by any other clear

 

afﬁrmative action by the data subiect signifying his or her agreement to personal data relating

 

to him or her being processed. This could include ticking a box when visiting an Internet

 

website or any other statement or conduct which clearly indicates in this context the data

 

subiect's acceptance of the proposed processing of their personal data. Silence or inactivity

 

should therefore not constitute consent. Where it is technically feasible and effective. the data

 

subiect's consent to processing may be given by using the appropriate settings of a browser or

 

other application”. In such cases it is sufﬁcient that the data subiect receives the information

 

needed to give freely speciﬁc and informed consent when starting to use the service. ( . . .).

 

Consent should cover all processing activities carried out for the same purpose or purposes.

 

When the processing has multiple purposes. unambiguous consent should be granted for all of

 

the processing purposes. If the data subiect's consent is to be given following an electronic

 

request. the request must be clear. concise and not unnecessarily disruptive to the use of the

 

. . . . . 20
serv1ce for Wthh 1t 1s prov1ded .

 

 

18
19
20

HU and DE would prefer to distinguish electronic from written statements.

PL and AT reservation.

UK, supported by CZ and IE, proposed adding: 'Where the intention is to store data for an as
yet unknown research purpose or as part of a research resource [such as a biobank or
cohort], then this should be explained to data subjects, setting out the types of research that
may be involved and any wider implications. This interpretation of consent does not affect
the need for derogations from the prohibition on processing sensitive categories of data for
scientiﬁc purposes' .

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 14
ANNEX DGD2C EN

25a) Genetic data should be deﬁned as personal data relating to the genetic characteristics of an

 

individual which have been inherited or acquired as they result from an analysis of a

 

biological sample from the individual in question. in particular by chromosomal.

 

deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or ribonucleic acid (RNA) analysis or analysis of any other

 

element enabling equivalent information to be obtained.

 

25aa) It is often not possible to fully identify the purpose of data processing for scientiﬁc purposes

 

26)

at the time of data collection. Therefore data subiects can give their consent to certain areas of

 

scientiﬁc research when in keeping with recognised ethical standards for scientiﬁc research21.

 

Data subiects should have the opportunity to give their consent only to certain areas of

 

research or parts of research proiects to the extent allowed by the intended purpose and

 

provided that this does not involve disproportionate efforts in view of the protective
22

 

[2111 [2056

Personal data concerning health should include (. . .) data pertaining to the health status of a

data subject which reveal information relating to the past. current or future physical or mental

 

health of the data subiectg; including information about the registration of the individual for

 

the provision of health services (. . .); a number, symbol or particular assigned to an individual
to uniquely identify the individual for health purposes; (. . .) information derived from the
testing or examination of a body part or bodily substance, including genetic data and
biological samples; (. . .) or any information on for example a disease, disability, disease risk,
medical history, clinical treatment, or the actual physiological or biomedical state of the data
subject independent of its source, such as for example from a physician or other health

professional, a hospital, a medical device, or an in vitro diagnostic test.

 

21
22
23

FR, AT and COM scrutiny reservation.

AT, CZ, PL, SI and FR scrutiny reservation; IT and COM reservation.

The Presidency points out that this recital may have to be aligned to the deﬁnition of health
data (Article 4(12)) to be agreed in the future.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 15
ANNEX DGD2C EN

27) The main establishment of a controller in the Union should be the place of its central
administration in the Union. unless the decisions on the purposes and means of the processing
of personal data are taken in another establishment of the controller in the Union. In this case
the latter should be considered as the main establishment. The main establishment of a
controller in the Union should be determined according to objective criteria and should imply
the effective and real exercise of management activities determining the main decisions as to
the purposes (. . .) and means of processing through stable arrangements. This criterion should
not depend on whether the processing of personal data is actually carried out at that location;
the presence and use of technical means and technologies for processing personal data or
processing activities do not, in themselves, constitute such main establishment and are
therefore not determining criteria for a main establishment. The main establishment of the
processor should be the place of its central administration in the Union and, if it has no central
administration in the Union, the place where the main processing activities take place in the
Union. In cases involving both the controller and the processor. the competent lead
supervisory authority should remain the supervisory authority of the Member State where the
controller has its main establishment but the supervisory authority of the processor should be
considered as a concerned supervisory authority and participate to the cooperation procedure
provided for by this Regulation. In any case. the supervisory authorities of the Member State
or Member States where the processor has one or more establishments should not be
considered as concerned supervisory authorities when the draft decision concerns only the

controller.

Where the processing is carried out by a group of undertakings. the main establishment of the
controlling undertaking should be considered as the main establishment of the group of

undertakings. except where the purposes and means of processing are determined by another

undertaking.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 16
ANNEX DGD2C EN

28) A group of undertakings should cover a controlling undertaking and its controlled
undertakings, whereby the controlling undertaking should be the undertaking which can
exercise a dominant inﬂuence over the other undertakings by virtue, for example, of
ownership, ﬁnancial participation or the rules which govern it or the power to have personal
data protection rules implemented. A central undertaking which controls24 the processing of
personal data in undertakings afﬁliated to it forms together with these undertakings an entity

which may be treated as “group of undertakings”25.

29) Children (. . .) deserve speciﬁc protection of their personal data, as they may be less aware of
risks, consequences, safeguards and their rights in relation to the processing of personal data.
(. . .)26. This concerns especially the use of personal data of children for the purposes of
marketing or creating personality or user proﬁles and the collection of child data when using

services offered directly to a child”.

 

24

ES suggestion, in line with the deﬁnition of group of undertakings.
25

F1 proposal supported by NL.
SI reservation.

 

26 COM reservation on deletion of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child reference.
27 CZ and AT reservation.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 17

ANNEX DGD2C EN

30) Any processing of personal data shopld be lawful and fair. (. . .). It should be transparent @

the individuals that personal data concerning them are collected. used. consulted or otherwise
processed and to which extent the data are processed or will be processed. The principle of
transparency requires that any information and communication relating to the processing of
those data should be easily accessible and easy to understand. and that clear and plain
language is used. This concerns in particular the information of the data subiects on the
identity of the controller and the purposes of the processing and further information to ensure
fair and transparent processing in respect of the individuals concerned and their right to get
conﬁrmation and communication of personal data being processed concerning them.
Individuals should be made aware on risks, rules, safeguards and rights in relation to the
processing of personal data and how to exercise his or her rights in relation to the processing.
In particular, the speciﬁc purposes for which the data are processed should be explicit and
legitimate and determined at the time of the collection of the data.28 The data should be
adequate and relevant (. . .) for the purposes for which the data are processed; this requires in
particular ensuring that the data collected are not excessive and that the period for which the
data are stored is limited to a strict minimum. (. . .). Personal data should only be processed if
the purpose of the processing could not reasonably be fulﬁlled by other means”. In order to
ensure that the data are not kept longer than necessary. time limits should be established by

the controller for erasure or for a periodic review.

Every reasonable step should be taken to ensure that personal data which are inaccurate are
rectiﬁed or deleted. Personal data should be processed in a manner that ensures appropriate
security and conﬁdentiality of the personal data. including preventing unauthorised access to

or the use of personal data and the equipment used for the processing.

 

28

29

DE suggested inserting the following sentence: 'Data processing for archiving and statistical
purposes in the public interest and for scientiﬁc or historical purposes is considered
compatible and can be conducted on the basis of the original legal basis (e. g. consent), if the
data have been initially collected for these purposes'.

UK reservation: this was too burdensome.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 18
ANNEX DGD2C EN

31) In order for processing to be lawful, personal data should be processed on the basis of the
consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate legal basis laid down by law, either
in this Regulation or in other Union or Member State law as referred to in this Regulation,
including the necessity for compliance with the legal obligation to which the controller is
subiect or the necessity for the performance of a contract to which the data subiect is party or

in order to take steps at the request of the data subiect prior to entering into a contract

31a) Wherever this Regulation refers to a legal basis or a legislative measure. this does not
necessarily require a legislative act adopted by a parliament. without preiudice to
requirements pursuant the constitutional order of the Member State concerned. however such
legal basis or legislative measure should be clear and precise and its application foreseeable
for those subiect to it as required by the case law of the Court of Justice of the European

Union and the European Court on Human Rights.

32) Where processing is based on the data subject's consent, the controller should be able to
demonstrate that the data subject has given the consent to the processing operation. In
particular in the context of a written declaration on another matter, safeguards should ensure
that the data subject is aware that, and the extent to which, consent is given. A declaration of
consent pre-formulated by the controller should be provided in an intelligible and easily
accessible form. using clear and plain language and its content should not be unusual within
the overall context. For consent to be informed. the data subiect should be aware at least of
the identity of the controller and the purposes of the processing for which the personal data
are intended: consent should not be regarded as freely-given if the data subiect has no genuine

and free choice and is unable to refuse or withdraw consent without detriment.

33) (...)

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 19
ANNEX DGD2C EN

34)

35)

35a)

In order to safeguard that consent has been freely-given. consent should not provide a valid
legal ground for the processing of personal data in a speciﬁc case where there is a clear
imbalance between the data subject and the controller and this imbalance makes it unlikely
that consent was given freely in all the circumstances of that speciﬁc situation. Consent is
presumed not to be freely given. if it does not allow separate consent to be given to different
data processing operations despite it is appropriate in the individual case. or if the
performance of a contract is made dependent on the consent despite this is not necessary for
such performance and the data subiect cannot reasonably obtain equivalent services from

- 30
another source w1thout consent .

 

Processing should be lawful where it is necessary in the context of a contract or the intended

entering into a contract.

This Regulation provides for general rules on data protection and that in speciﬁc cases
Member States are also empowered to lay down national rules on data protection. The
Regulation does therefore not exclude Member State law that deﬁnes the circumstances of
speciﬁc processing situations. including determining more precisely the conditions under
which processing of personal data is lawful. National law may also provide for special

processing conditions for speciﬁc sectors and for the processing of special categories of data.

 

30

COM, DE, DK, IE, NL and FR, SE reservation. CZ thought the wording should be more
generic. IE suggested replacing the ﬁnal part of the sentence with the following: "... or if the
performance of a contract is made dependant on consent to a different data processing
operation despite this not being necessary for such performance and the data subject cannot
reasonably obtain equivalent services from another source without such consent.‘'

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 20
ANNEX DGD2C EN

36) Where processing is carried out in compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller
is subject or where processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the
public interest or in the exercise of an ofﬁcial authority, the processing should have a (. . .)
basis in Union law or in the national law of a Member State. (. . .). It should be also for Union
or national law to determine the purpose of the processing. Furthermore, this (. . .) basis could

specify the general conditions of the Regulation governing the lawfulness of data processing

 

determine speciﬁcations for determining the controller, the type of data which are subject to
the processing, the data subjects concerned, the entities to which the data may be disclosed,
the purpose limitations, the storage period and other measures to ensure lawful and fair

processing.

It should also be for Union or national law to determine whether the controller performing a
task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority should be a public
authority or another natural or legal person governed by public law, or by private law such as
a professional association, where grounds of public interest so justify including for health
purposes, such as public health and social protection and the management of health care

services.

37) The processing of personal data should equally be regarded as lawful where it is necessary to

protect an interest which is essential for the data subject's life or that of another person. (. . .).

 

Some types of data processing may serve both important grounds of public interest and the

 

vital interests of the data subject as, for instance when processing is necessary for

 

humanitarian purposes. including for monitoring epidemic and its spread or in situations of

 

. . . . . . . . . 31
humanitarian emergenczes, in particular in Situations of natural disasters .

 

 

3' CZ, FR, SE and PL thought the entire recital was superﬂuous.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 21
ANNEX DGD2C EN

38) The legitimate interests of a controller including of a controller to which the data may be

disclosed or of a third party may provide a legal basis for processing, provided that the

 

interests or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject are not overriding.
Legitimate interest could exist for example when there is a relevant and appropriate
connection between the data subiect and the controller in situations such as the data subiect
being a client or in the service of the controller32. (. . .) At any rate the existence of a legitimate
interest would need careful assessment including whether a data subiect can expect at the time
and in the context of the collection of the data that processing for this purpose may take place.
In particular such assessment must take into account whether the data subject is a child, given
that children deserve speciﬁc protection. The data subject should have the right to object Q
the processing, on grounds relating to their particular situation and free of charge. To ensure
transparency, the controller should be obliged to explicitly inform the data subject on the
legitimate interests pursued and on the right to object, and also be obliged to document these

legitimate interests. (. . .)

38a) Controllers that are part of a group of undertakings or institution afﬁliated to a central body
may have a legitimate interest to transmit personal data within the group of undertakings for
internal administrative purposes, including the processing of clients' or employees' personal
data. The general principles for the transfer of personal data, within a group of undertakings.

to an undertaking located in a third country (. . .) remain unaffected.Q

 

32
33

HU scrutiny reservation.
FR reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 22
ANNEX DGD2C EN

39) The processing of data to the extent strictly necessary for the purposes of ensuring network
and information security, i.e. the ability of a network or an information system to resist, at a
given level of conﬁdence, accidental events or unlawful or malicious actions that compromise
the availability, authenticity, integrity and conﬁdentiality of stored or transmitted data, and the
security of the related services offered by, or accessible via, these networks and systems, by
public authorities, Computer Emergency Response Teams — CERTs, Computer Security
Incident Response Teams — CSIRTs, providers of electronic communications networks and
services and by providers of security technologies and services, constitutes a legitimate
interest of the data controller concerned. This could, for example, include preventing
unauthorised access to electronic communications networks and malicious code distribution
and stopping ‘denial of service’ attacks and damage to computer and electronic
communication systems. The processing of personal data strictly necessary for the purposes of
preventing fraud also constitutes a legitimate interest of the data controller concerned. The

processing of personal data for direct marketing purposes may be regarded as carried out for a

legitimate interest.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 23
ANNEX DGD2C EN

40) 34The processing of personal data for other purposes than the purposes for which the data

 

have been initially collected should be only allowed where the processing is compatible with

 

those purposes for which the data have been initially collected. In such case no separate legal

 

basis is required other than the one which allowed the collection of the data”. (. . .) If the

 

processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the

 

exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller. Union law or Member State law may

 

determine and specify the tasks and purposes for which the further processing shall be

 

 

 

regarded as lawful. The further processing (. . .) for archiving purposes in the public interest

g, statistical, scientiﬁc or historical (. . .) purposes (. . .) or in view of future dispute

 

resolution36 should be considered as compatible lawful processing operations. The legal basis

 

provided by Union or Member State law for the collection and processing of personal data

 

may also provide a legal basis for further processing for other purposes if these purposes are

 

in line with the assigned task and the controller is entitled legally to collect the data for these

 

37
other purposes—.

In order to ascertain whether a purpose of further processing is compatible with the purpose
for which the data are initially collected, the controller, after having met all the requirements
for the lawfulness of the original processing, should take into account inter alia any link
between those purposes and the purposes of the intended further processing, the context in
which the data have been collected, including the reasonable expectations of the data subject
as to their further use, the nature of the personal data, the consequences of the intended further
processing for data subjects, and the existence of appropriate safeguards in both the original
and intended processing operations. Where the intended other purpose is not compatible with
the initial one for which the data are collected, the controller should obtain the consent of the
data subject for this other purpose or should base the processing on another legitimate ground
for lawful processing, in particular where provided by Union law or the law of the Member

State to which the controller is subject. (. . .).

 

34 -
AT reservatlon

FR scrutiny reservation

Cion reservation.

DE suggested to replace other than the one which allowed the collection of the data " but as
long as the original legal basis covers as well the processing for the further purpose.

ES pointed out the text of Article 6 had not been modiﬁed regarding dispute resolution.

FR, IT and UK scrutiny reservation.

35

36
37

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 24
ANNEX DGD2C EN

41)

In any case, the application of the principles set out by this Regulation and in particular the

information of the data subject on those other purposes and on his or her rights ( . . .) including

 

the right to object, should be ensured. (. . .). Indicating possible criminal acts or threats to

 

public security by the controller and transmitting these data to a competent authority should

 

be regarded as being in the legitimate interest pursued by the controller”. However such

 

transmission in the legitimate interest of the controller or further processing of personal data

 

should be prohibited if the processing is not compatible with a legal, professional or other

binding obligation of secrecy.ﬂ

Personal data which are, by their nature, particularly sensitive (. . .) in relation to fundamental

rights and freedoms, deserve speciﬁc protection as the context of their processing may create

 

important risks for the fundamental rights and freedoms. These data should also include

 

personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin. whereby the use of the term 'racial origin' in

 

this Regulation does not imply an acceptance by the European Union of theories which

 

attempt to determine the existence of separate human races. Such_data should not be

 

processed, unless processing is allowed in speciﬁc cases set out in this Regulation. taking into

 

account that that Member States law may lay down speciﬁc provisions on data protection in

 

order to adapt the application of the rules of this Regulation40 for compliance with a legal

 

obligation or for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise

 

of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller. In addition to the speciﬁc requirements for such

 

processing the general principles and other rules of this Regulation should apply. in particular

 

as regards the conditions for lawful processing. Derogations from the general prohibition for

 

processing such special categories of personal data should be explicitly provided inter alia
where the data subject gives his or her explicit consent or in respect of speciﬁc needs, in
particular where the processing is carried out in the course of legitimate activities by certain
associations or foundations the purpose of which is to permit the exercise of fundamental

freedoms.

 

38
39

40

AT, PL and COM reservation.

IE, SE and UK queried the last sentence of recital 40, which was not reﬂected in the body of
the text. DE, supported by CZ, IE, GR and PL, wanted it to be made clear that Article 6 did
not hamper direct marketing or credit information services or businesses in general
according to GR.

AT scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 25
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Special categories of personal data may also be processed where the data have manifestly

 

been made public or voluntarily and at the request of the data subiect transferred to the

controller for a speciﬁc purpose speciﬁed by the data subiect. where the processing is done in

 

the interest of the data subiect.

 

Member State and Union Law may provide that the general prohibition for processing such
special categories of personal data in certain cases may not be lifted by the data subject’s

explicit consent.

42) Derogating from the prohibition on processing sensitive categories of data should also be

allowed when provided for in Union or Member State law, and subject to suitable safeguards,

 

so as to protect personal data and other fundamental rights, where (. . .) grounds of public

interest so justify. in particular processing data in the ﬁeld of employment law. social security

 

and social protection law. including pensions and for health security, monitoring and alert

 

purposes, the prevention or control of communicable diseases and other serious threats to

 

health or ensuring high standards of quality and safety of health care and services and of

 

medicinal products or medical devices or assessing public policies adopted in the ﬁeld of

 

health, also by producing quality and activity indicators.

 

This may be done for health purposes, including public health (. . .) and the management of
health-care services, especially in order to ensure the quality and cost-effectiveness of the
procedures used for settling claims for beneﬁts and services in the health insurance system, or

for archiving in the public interest or historical, statistical and scientiﬁc (. . .) purposes.

 

A derogation should also allow processing of such data where necessary for the

 

establishment. exercise or defence of legal claims. regardless of whether in a iudicial

 

procedure or whether in an administrative or any out-of-court procedure.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 26
ANNEX DGD2C EN

42a) Special categories of personal data which deserve higher protection, may only be processed

for health-related purposes where necessary to achieve those purposes for the beneﬁt of

individuals and society as a whole, in particular in the context of the management of health or

 

social care services and systems including the processing by the management and central
national health authorities of such data for the purpose of quality control. management
information and the general national and local supervision of the health or social care system.
M ensuring continuity of health or social care and cross-border healthcare or health
security, monitoring and alert purposes or for archiving purposes in the public interest, for
historical, statistical or scientiﬁc purposes as well as for studies conducted in the public
interest in the area of public health. Therefore this Regulation should provide for harmonised
conditions for the processing of special categories of personal data concerning health, i_n
respect of speciﬁc needs, in particular where the processing of these data is carried out for
certain health-related purposes by persons subject to a legal obligation of professional
secrecy (...). Union or Member State law should provide for speciﬁc and suitable measures so

as to protect the fundamental rights and the personal data of individuals. (. . .)4'.

 

41

Moved from recital 122.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 27
ANNEX DGD2C EN

42b) The processing of special categories of personal data (. . .) may be necessary for reasons of
public interest in the areas of public health without consent of the data subject. M
processing is subject to suitable and speciﬁc measures so as to protect the rights and
ﬂeedoms of individuals. In that context, ‘public health ’ should be interpreted as deﬁned in
Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
I 6 December 2008 on Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work,
meaning all elements related to health, namely health status, including morbidity and
disability, the determinants having an eﬂect on that health status, health care needs,
resources allocated to health care, the provision of and universal access to, health care as
well as health care expenditure and ﬁnancing, and the causes of mortality. Such processing of
personal data concerning health for reasons of public interest should not result in personal
data being processed for other purposes by third parties such as employers, insurance and

. . 42
banking companies .

43) Moreover, the processing of personal data by ofﬁcial authorities for achieving aims, laid
down in constitutional law or international public law, of ofﬁcially recognised religious

associations is carried out on grounds of public interest.

44) Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system requires in
a Member State that political parties compile data on people's political opinions, the
processing of such data may be permitted for reasons of public interest, provided that

appropriate safeguards are established.

45) If the data processed by a controller do not permit the controller to identify a natural person
(. . .) the data controller should not be obliged to acquire additional information in order to
identify the data subject for the sole purpose of complying with any provision of this
Regulation. (. . .). However. the controller should not refuse to take additional information

provided by the data subiect in order to support the exercise of his or her rights.

 

42 Moved from recital 123.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 28
ANNEX DGD2C EN

46)

47)

43The principle of transparency requires that any information addressed to the public or to the
data subject should be easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain

language and. additionally. where appropriate. visualisation is used. This information could be

 

provided also in electronic form. for example. when addressed to the public. through a

 

website. This is in particular relevant where in situations, such as online advertising, the
proliferation of actors and the technological complexity of practice makes it difﬁcult for the
data subject to know and understand if personal data relating to them are being collected, by
whom and for what purpose. Given that children deserve speciﬁc protection, any information
and communication, where processing is addressed (. . .) to a child, should be in such a clear

and plain language that the child can easily understand.

Modalities should be provided for facilitating the data subject’s exercise of their rights
provided by this Regulation, including mechanisms to request, (. . .) in particular access to

data, rectiﬁcation, erasure and to exercise the right to object. Thus the controller should also

 

provide means for requests to be made electronically. especially where personal data are

 

processed by electronic means. The controller should be obliged to respond to requests of the

 

data subject without undue delay and at the latest within a ﬁxed deadline of one month and

 

give reasons where the controller does not intend to comply with the data subject's request.

 

43

DE suggestion (8089/15) partly taken over.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 29
ANNEX DGD2C EN

48)

However. if requests are manifestly unfounded or excessive44 such as when the data subiect
unreasonably and45 repetitiously requests information or where the data subiect abuses its

right to receive information for example by providing false or misleading information when

 

making the request. the controller could“ refuse to act on the request. ﬂ

 

48The principles of fair and transparent processing require that the data subject should be
informed (. . .) of the existence of the processing operation and its purposes (. . .). T_he
controller should provide the data subiect with any further information necessary to guarantee
fair and transparent processing. Furthermore the data subiect should be informed about the

existence of proﬁling and the consequences of such proﬁling. Where the data are collected

 

from the data subject, the data subject should also be informed whether they are obliged to

provide the data and of the consequences, in cases they do not provide such data.

 

44
45
46
47

48

Cion suggestion. As in Article 12(4).

CZ suggested or instead of "and".

PT suggested instead "may".

AT suggested to delete the last sentence as repetitiously requesting information must not as
such be considered that the request is manifestly unfounded. Alternatively, AT
suggested“However, if requests are manifestly unfounded such as when the data subject
repetitiously requests information despite complete and correct information or despite
properly substantiated denial of information or well-founded restriction of information by
the controller = - '- ' ' ' - ' ' - -

 

 
 
 

, the controller could

 

refuse to act on the request.”
AT: scrutiny reservation on "abuses its right".
AT suggested "shall" instead of "should" throughout recital (48).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 30
ANNEX DGD2C EN

49) QThe information in relation to the processing of personal data relating to the data subject
should be given to them at the time of collection, or, where the data are not collected from the
data subject, within a reasonable period, depending on the circumstances of the case. Where
data can be legitimately disclosed to another recipient, the data subject should be informed

when the data are ﬁrst disclosed to the recipient. Where the controller intends to process the

 

data for a purpose other than the one for which the data were collected the controller should

 

provide the data subiect prior to that further processing with information on that other purpose

 

and other necessary informations". Where the origin of the data could not be provided to the

 

data subiect because various sources have been used. the information should be provided in a

 

general manner.

50) However, it is not necessary to impose this obligation where the data subject already
possesses this information, or where the recording or disclosure of the data is expressly laid
down by law, or where the provision of information to the data subject proves impossible or
would involve disproportionate efforts. The latter could be particularly the case where

processing is for archiving purposes in the public interest. for historical, statistical or scientiﬁc

 

(. . .) purposes; in this regard, the number of data subjects, the age of the data, and any

appropriate safeguards adopted may be taken into consideration.

 

49

50 AT suggested "shall" instead of "should" throughout the recital.

NL suggested to insert "in an appropriate manner'' with a view to alleviating concerns of
business. IE considered this sentence burdensome, in particular in case the other purpose is
compatible with the initial purpose.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 31
ANNEX DGD2C EN

51) A natural person should have the right of access to data which has been collected concerning

him or her, and to exercise this right easily and at reasonable intervals. in order to be aware o_f

 

and verify the lawfulness of the processing. This includes the right for individuals to have
access to their 51personal data concerning their health, for example the data in their medical
records containing such information as diagnosis, examination results, assessments by
treating physicians and any treatment or interventions provided Every data subject should
therefore have the right to know and obtain communication in particular for what purposes the
data are processed, where possible for what period, which recipients receive the data, what is
the logic involved in any automatic data processing_and what might be, at least when based on
proﬁling, the consequences of such processing. This right should not adversely affect the
rights and freedoms of others, including trade secrets or intellectual property and in particular
the copyright protecting the software. However, the result of these considerations should not

be that all information is refused to the data subject. Where the controller processes a large

 

quantity of information concerning the data subiect. the controller may request that before the
information is delivered the data subiect specify to which information or to which processing

activities the request relates.

 

51

FR suggested to insert "login data and to their".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 32
ANNEX DGD2C EN

52) The controller should use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject w_ho
requests access, in particular in the context of online services and online identiﬁers. (. . .)
Identiﬁcation should include the digital identiﬁcation of a data subiect. for example through
authentication mechanism such as the same credentials. used by the data subiect to log-into
the on-line service offered by the data controller52. A controller should not retain personal

data for the sole purpose of being able to react to potential requests.53

 

52 Presidency suggestion to ensure identiﬁcation in digital era amended according to BE

proposal.

CZ, SI: reservation on added phrase.

Presidency suggestion taking into account the suggestions of R0 and BE. RO suggested:
‘ﬁnexample—througha—log—m—onan—e—mat-l—address" with ,for example through the same
credentials (username or e-mail address and password or any other combination of
credentials used to log into an on-line service ) used by the data subject to log-into the on-
line service oﬂered by the data controller". BE suggested: "Identiﬁcation should include
the digital identiﬁcation of a data subiect. for example through an authentication
mechanism. such as log- 1-n er—an—e—mai—l—addressr"

53

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 33
ANNEX DGD2C EN

53) A natural person should have the right to have personal data concerning them rectiﬁed and a

'right to be forgotten' where the retention of such data is not in compliance with this

Regulation or with Union or Member State law to which the controller is subiect. In

 

particular, data subjects should have the right that their personal data are erased and no longer
processed, where the data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which the
data are collected or otherwise processed, where data subjects have withdrawn their consent
for processing or where they object to the processing of personal data concerning them or
where the processing of their personal data otherwise does not comply with this Regulation.
This right is in particular relevant, when the data subject has given their—consent as a child,
when not being fully aware of the risks involved by the processing, and later wants to remove

such personal data especially on the Intemetﬁ. The data subiect should be able to exercise this

 

right notwithstanding the fact that he or she is no longer a child. However, the further
retention of the data should be MT where it is necessary for exercising the right of
freedom of expression and information, for compliance with a legal obligation. for the
performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority
vested in the controller. for reasons of public interest in the area of public health, for
archiving purposes in the public interest. for historical, statistical and scientiﬁc (. . .) purposes

or for the establishment. exercise or defence of legal claims.56

 

54

55
56

Inspired by FR suggestion, supported by HU, SI, to strengthen the rights of children as
follows: This right should be exercised notwithstanding the fact that the data subject is no
longer a child.

DE suggestion.

NL considered that recital (53a) could be deleted as it is covered by recital (54a).

PL made a suggestion for an alternative text of recital (53a) (7586/15 REV1).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 34
ANNEX DGD2C EN

54)

54a)

55)

To strengthen the 'right to be forgotten' in the online environment, the right to erasure should
also be extended in such a way that a controller who has made the personal data public should
be obliged to inform the controllers who are processing such data (...) to erase any links to, or
copies or replications of that personal data.

To ensure the above57 mentioned information, the controller should take (. . .) reasonable
steps, taking into account available technology and the means available to the controller.
including technical measures, in relation to data for the publication of which the controller is

responsible. (. . .).

Methods to restrict processing of personal data could include. inter alia. temporarily moving
the selected data to another processing system or making the selected data unavailable to
users or temporarily removing published data from a website. In automated ﬁling systems the
restriction of processing of personal data should in principle be ensured by technical means:
the fact that the processing of personal data is restricted should be indicated in the system in
such a way that it is clear that the processing of the personal data is restricted.

To further strengthen the control over their own data (. . .), where the processing of personal
data is carried out by automated means, the data subject should also be allowed to receive the
personal data concerning him or herﬂ, which he or she has provided to a controller in a

—1—

structured and commonly used and machine-readable format and transmit it to another

 

controller.

This right should apply where the data subject provided the personal data based on his or her
consent or in the performance of a contract. It should not apply where processing is based on

 

another legal ground other than consent or contract. By its very nature this right should not be
exercised against controllers processing data in the exercise of their public duties. It should
therefore in particular not apply where processing of the personal data is necessary for
compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subiect or for the performance of

a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of an ofﬁcial authority vested in the

controller.

 

57
58

DE suggested "the above'' instead of "this".

DE, FR Cion, wanted to re-insert in Article 18(2) and in recital (5 5) the phrase "and any
other information'' considering that not having this phrase would decrease the scope of data
portability too much.

Cion: scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 35
ANNEX DGD2C EN

56)

57)

The data subiect’s right to transmit personal data does not create an obligation for the

controllers to adopt or maintain data processing systems which are technically compatibleg

Where, in a certain set of personal data, more than one data subject is concerned, the right to
transmit the data should be without preiudice to the requirements on the lawfulness of the
processing of personal data related to another data subiect in accordance with this
Regulation. 60This right should also not preiudice the right of the data subiect to obtain the
erasure of personal data and the limitations of that right as set out in this Regulation and
should in particular not imply the erasure of personal data concerning the data subject which
have been provided by him or her for the performance of a contract, to the extent and as long

as the data are necessary for the performance of that contract. (. . .)

61In cases where personal data might lawfully be processed (. . .) because processing is
necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of
ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller or on grounds of (. . .) the legitimate interests of a
controller or a third par_ty, any data subject should nevertheless be entitled to object to the
processing of any data relating to their particular situation. It should be for the controller to
demonstrate that their compelling legitimate interests may override the interests or the

fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject.

Where personal data are processed for the purposes of direct marketing, the data subject

should have the right to object to such processing whether initial or further processing. free of

 

charge and in a manner that can be easily and effectively invoked.

 

59

60

61

F1 proposal.

AT and Cion scrutiny reservation.

FR suggested to delete the ﬁrst sentence of this subparagraph. In reaction, Pres explained
that recital 55 was narrower than right to access because it concerned right to data
portability.

Presidency suggestion to bring recital (56) in line with Article 19(1).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 36
ANNEX DGD2C EN

58) The data subiect should have the right not to be subiect to a decision evaluating personal
aspects relating to him or her (...) which is based solely on automated processing. which
produces legal eﬂects concerning him or her or signiﬁcantly affects him or her. like automatic
refusal of an on-line credit application or e-recruiting practices without any human
intervention. Such processing includes also 'proﬁling' consisting in any form of automated
processing of personal data evaluating personal aspects relating to a natural person. in
particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning performance at work. economic situation.
health. personal preferences or interests. reliability or behaviour. location or movements as
long as it produces legal effects concerning him or her or signiﬁcantly affects him or her”.
However, decision making based on such processing including proﬁling should be allowed
when authorised by Union or Member State law to which the controller is subiect. including
for fraud and tax evasion monitoring and prevention purposes and to ensure the security and
reliability of a service provided by the controller. or necessary for the entering or performance

of a contract between the data subiect and a controller. or when the data subject has given his

 

or her explicit consent. In any case, such processing should be subject to suitable safeguards,
including speciﬁc information of the data subject and the right to obtain human intervention,
to express his or her point of view. to get an explanation of the decision reached after such
assessment and the right to contest the decision. In order to ensure fair and transparent
processing in respect of the data subiect. having regard to the speciﬁc circumstances and
context in which the personal data are processed. the controller should use adequate
mathematical or statistical procedures for the proﬁling implement technical and
organisational measures appropriate to ensure in particular that factors which result in data
inaccuracies are corrected and the risk of errors is minimized. secure personal data in a way
which takes account of the potential risks involved for the interests and rights of the data
subiect63 and which prevents inter alia discriminatory effects against individuals on the basis
of race or ethnic origin. political opinions. religion or beliefs. trade union membership.
genetic or health status. sexual orientation or that result in measures having such effectﬁ.
Automated decision making and proﬁling based on special categories of personal data should

only be allowed under speciﬁc conditions.

 

 

62 UK suggested to insert "in an adverse manner". In reaction, Cion indicated this would lower

data protection standards.

AT reservation on "as long as it produces legal effects concerning him or her or signiﬁcantly
affects him or her".

Further to DE proposal. IE expressed doubts about the before last sentence.

UK considered Regulation not the appropriate place to refer to anti-discrimination measures.

63
64

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 37
ANNEX DGD2C EN

58a) Proﬁling as such is subiect to the (general) rules of this Regulation governing processing of

 

personal data (legal grounds of processing data protection principles etc.) with speciﬁc

 

safeguards (for instance the obligation to conduct an impact assessment in some cases or

 

provisions concerning speciﬁc information to be provided to the concerned individual). The

 

European Data Protection Board should have the possibility to issue guidance in this

 

65
context.

59) Restrictions on speciﬁc principles and on the rights of information, access, rectiﬁcation and
erasure or on the right to data portability, the right to object, measures based on proﬁling, as
well as on the communication of a personal data breach to a data subject and on certain
related obligations of the controllers may be imposed by Union or Member State law, as far as
necessary and proportionate in a democratic society to safeguard public security, including the
protection of human life especially in response to natural or man made disasters, the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of criminal offences or of breaches of ethics for
regulated professions, other public interests of the Union or of a Member State, in particular
an important economic or ﬁnancial interest of the Union or of a Member State, the keeping of

public registers kept for reasons of general public interest. further processing of archived

 

personal data to provide speciﬁc information related to the political behaviour under former

 

totalitarian state regimes or the protection of the data subject or the rights and freedoms of

others, including social protection, public health and humanitarian purposes. such as the

 

performance of a task incumbent upon the International Red Cross and Red Crescent

Movement (... LE Those restrictions should be in compliance with requirements set out by the

 

Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and by the European Convention for

the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

59a) Nothing in this Regulation should derogate from ( . . .) the privilege of non-disclosure of

 

conﬁdential information of the International Committee of the Red Cross under international

 

law. which shall be applicable in judicial and administrative proceedings. (. . .).

 

 

65
66

DE suggested in recital (59) to delete "public" in "...the keeping of public registers".
AT opposed explicit mentioning of International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in
recitals (59), (59a) and (87).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 38
ANNEX DGD2C EN

60)

60a)

60b)

TE responsibility and liability of the controller for any processing of personal data carried
out by the controller or on the controller's behalf should be established. In particular, the
controller should (. . .) be obliged to implement appropriate measures and be able to
demonstrate the compliance of (. . .) processing activities with this Regulation (. . .).Thﬁ
measures should take into account the nature. scope. context and purposes of the processing

and the risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals.

Such risks. of varying likelihood and severity. may result from data processing which could
lead to physical. material or moral damage. in particular where the processing may give rise to
discrimination. identity theft or fraud. ﬁnancial loss. damage to the reputation. loss of
conﬁdentiality of data protected by professional secrecy. unauthorized reversal of
pseudonymisation. or any other signiﬁcant economic or social disadvantage: or where data
subiects might be deprived of their rights and freedoms or from exercising control over their
personal data: where personal data are processed which reveal racial or ethnic origin. political
opinions. religion or philosophical beliefs. trade-union membership. and the processing of
genetic data or data concerning health or sex life or criminal convictions and offences or
related security measures: where personal aspects are evaluated. in particular analysing and
prediction of aspects concerning performance at work. economic situation. health. personal
preferences or interests. reliability or behaviour. location or movements. in order to create or
use personal proﬁles: where personal data of vulnerable individuals. in particular of children.
are processed: where processing involves a large amount of personal data and affects a large

number of data subiects: (. . .).

The likelihood and severity of the risk should be determined in ﬁtnction of the nature, scope,
context and purposes of the data processing. Risk should be evaluated on an objective
assessment, by which it is established whether data processing operations involve a high risk.

A high risk is a particular67 risk of prejudice to the rights and ﬁeedoms of individuals (. . .).

 

67

The use the word 'particular' was questioned by BE, CZ, ES and UK, which thought that this
term does not express the seriousness of the risk in case of 'high' risk.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 39
ANNEX DGD2C EN

60c) Guidance for the implementation of appropriate measures. and for demonstrating the

61)

62)

compliance by the controller or processor“. especially as regards the identiﬁcation of the risk
related to the processing their assessment in terms of their origin. nature. likelihood and
severity. and the identiﬁcation of best practices to mitigate the risk. could be provided in
particular by approved codes of conduct. approved certiﬁcations. guidelines of the European
Data Protection Board or through the indications provided by a data protection ofﬁcer. The
European Data Protection Board may also issue guidelines on processing operations that are
considered to be unlikely to result in a high risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals and

indicate what measures may be sufﬁcient in such cases to address such risk. (. . .)

The protection of the rights and freedoms of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data require that appropriate technical and organisational measures are taken to
ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met. In order to be able to demonstrate
compliance with this Regulation, the controller should adopt internal policies and implement
appropriate measures, which meet in particular the principles of data protection by design and
data protection by default. Such measures could consist inter alia of minimising the
processing of personal data. (. . .) pseudonymising personal data as soon as possible.
transparency with regard to the functions and processing of personal data. enabling the data
subiect to monitor the data processing enabling the controller to create and improve security
features. When developing. designing selecting and using applications. services and products
that are either based on the processing of personal data or process personal data to fulﬁl their
task producers of the products. services and applications should be encouraged to take into
account the right to data protection when developing and designing such products. services
and applications and. with due regard to the state of the art. to make sure that controllers and

processors are able to fulﬁl their data protection obligations.

The protection of the rights and freedoms of data subjects as well as the responsibility and
liability of controllers and processors, also in relation to the monitoring by and measures of
supervisory authorities, requires a clear attribution of the responsibilities under this
Regulation, including where a controller determines the purposes (. . .) and means of the
processing jointly with other controllers or where a processing operation is carried out on

behalf of a controller.

 

AT, BE, scrutiny reservation

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 40
ANNEX DGD2C EN

63) Where a controller not established in the Union is processing personal data of data subjects
residing in the Union whose processing activities are related to the offering of goods or
services to such data subjects, or to the monitoring of their behaviour in the Union, (. . .) the
controller should designate a representative, unless (. . .) the processing it carries out is
occasional and unlikely to result in a risk for the rights and ﬁeedoms of data subiects, taking
into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing or the controller is a
public authority or body (. . .). The representative should act on behalf of the controller and
may be addressed by any supervisory authority. The representative should be explicitly
designated by a written mandate of the controller to act on its behalf with regard to the latter's
obligations under this Regulation. The designation of such representative does not affect the
responsibility and liability of the controller under this Regulation. Such representative should
perform its tasks according to the received mandate from the controller. including to
cooperate with the competent supervisory authorities on any action taken in ensuring
compliance with this Regulation. The designated representative should be subiected to

enforcement actions in case of non-compliance by the controller.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 41
ANNEX DGD2C EN

63a) To ensure compliance with the requirements of this Regulation in respect of the processing to

64)

65)

be carried out by the processor on behalf of the controller, when entrusting a processor with
processing activities, the controller should use only processors providing sufﬁcient
guarantees, in particular in terms of expert knowledge, reliability and resources, to implement
technical and organisational measures which will meet the requirements of this Regulation,
including for the security of processing. (. . .) Adherence of the processor to an approved code

of conduct or an approved certiﬁcation mechanism may be used as an element to demonstrate

 

compliance with the obligations of the controller. The carrying out of processing by a
processor should be governed by a contract or other legal act under Union or Member State
law, binding the processor to the controller, setting out the subject-matter and duration of the
processing, the nature and purposes of the processing, the type of personal data and categories
of data subjects, taking into account the speciﬁc tasks and responsibilities of the processor in
the context of the processing to be carried out and the risk for the rights and freedoms of the

data subject.

The controller and processor may choose to use an individual contract or standard contractual
clauses which are adopted either directly by the Commission or by a supervisory authority in
accordance with the consistency mechanism and then adopted by the Commission, or which
are part of a certiﬁcation granted in the certiﬁcation mechanism. After the completion of the
processing on behalf of the controller, the processor should return or delete the personal data,
unless there is a requirement to store the data under Union or Member State law to which the

processor is subject.

In order to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, the controller or processor should
maintain records regarding all categories of processing activities under its responsibility. Each
controller and processor should be obliged to co-operate with the supervisory authority and
make these records, on request, available to it, so that it might serve for monitoring those

processing operations.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 42
ANNEX DGD2C EN

66)

66a)

In order to maintain security and to prevent processing in breach of this Regulation, the
controller or processor should evaluate the (. . .) risks inherent to the processing and
implement measures to mitigate those risk. These measures should ensure an appropriate level
of security, including conﬁdentiality. taking into account available technology and the costs
of (. . .) implementation in relation to the risk and the nature of the personal data to be
protected. (. . .). In assessing data security risk. consideration should be given to the risks that
are presented by data processing. such as accidental or unlawful destruction. loss. alteration.
unauthorised disclosure of. or access to personal data transmitted. stored or otherwise

processed. which may in particular lead to physical. material or moral damage.

In order to enhance compliance with this Regulation in cases where the processing operations
are likely to result in a high risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals. the controllerﬂ
should be responsible for the carrying out of a data protection impact assessment to evaluate.
in particular. the origin. nature. particularity and severity of this risk. The outcome of the
assessment should be taken into account when determining the appropriate measures to be
taken in order to demonstrate that the processing of personal data is in compliance with this
Regulation. Where a data protection impact assessment indicates that processing operations
involve a high risk which the controller cannot mitigate by appropriate measures in terms of
available technology and costs of implementation. a consultation of the supervisory authority

should take place prior to the processing.

 

69

AT: scrutiny reservation

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 43
ANNEX DGD2C EN

67) A personal data breach may, if not addressed in an adequate and timely manner, result in (. . .)
physical. material or moral damage to individuals such as loss of control over their personal

data or limitation of (. . .) their rights. discrimination. identity theft or fraud. ﬁnancial loss.

 

unauthorized reversal of pseudonymisation. damage to the reputation. loss of conﬁdentiality

 

of data protected by professional secrecy or any other economic or social disadvantage to the

 

individual concerned. (. . .), Therefore, as soon as the controller becomes aware that (. . .) a

personal data breach which may result in (. . .) physical. material or moral damage has

 

occurred_the controller should notify the breach to the supervisory authority without undue
delay and, where feasible, within 2 hours. Where this cannot b_eachieved within 2 hours, an
explanation of the reasons for the delay should accompany the notiﬁcation. The individuals

whose rights and freedoms could be severely affected by the breach should be notiﬁed

 

without undue delay in order to allow them to take the necessary precautions. (. . .). The
notiﬁcation should describe the nature of the personal data breach as well as
recommendations for the individual concerned to mitigate potential adverse effects.
Notiﬁcations to data subjects should be made as soon as reasonably feasible, and in close
cooperation with the supervisory authority and respecting guidance provided by it or other
relevant authorities (e. g. law enforcement authorities). For example (. . .) the need to mitigate
an immediate risk of damage would call for a prompt notiﬁcation of data subjects whereas the
need to implement appropriate measures against continuing or similar data breaches may

justify a longer delay.

68) (. . .) It must be ascertained whether a_ll appropriate technological protection and organisational
measures have been implemented to establish immediately whether a personal data breach has
taken place and to inform promptly the supervisory authority and the data subject (. . .). T_he

fact that the notiﬁcation was made without undue delay should be established taking into

 

account in particular the nature and gravity of the personal data breach and its consequences

and adverse effects for the data subject. Such notiﬁcation may result in an intervention of the

 

supervisory authority in accordance with its tasks and powers laid down in this Regulation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 44
ANNEX DGD2C EN

68a) The communication of a personal data breach to the data subiect should not be required if the

69)

70)

controller has implemented appropriate technological protection measures. and that those
measures were applied to the data affected by the personal data breach. Such technological
protection measures should include those that render the data unintelligible to any person who

is not authorised to access it. in particular by encrypting the personal data (. . .).

In setting detailed rules concerning the format and procedures applicable to the notiﬁcation of
personal data breaches, due consideration should be given to the circumstances of the breach,
including whether or not personal data had been protected by appropriate technical protection
measures, effectively limiting the likelihood of identity fraud or other forms of misuse.
Moreover, such rules and procedures should take into account the legitimate interests of law
enforcement authorities in cases where early disclosure could unnecessarily hamper the

investigation of the circumstances of a breach.

Directive 95/46/EC provided for a general obligation to notify processing of personal data to
the supervisory authorities. While this obligation produces administrative and ﬁnancial
burdens, it did not in all cases contribute to improving the protection of personal data.
Therefore such indiscriminate general notiﬁcation obligations should be abolished, and
replaced by effective procedures and mechanisms which focus instead on those M
processing operations which are likely to w a mgh risk to the rights and freedoms of
individuals by virtue of their nature, scope, context ﬂ purposes (. . .). Such types of

processing operations may be those which. in particular, involve using new technologies, g

 

are of a new kind and where no data protection impact assessment has been carried out before
by the controller. or where they become necessary in the light of the time that has elapsed

. . . . . 70
s1nce the initial processing .

 

 

70

BE was opposed to the temporal reference in the last part of this sentence.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 45
ANNEX DGD2C EN

70a) In such cases, a data protection impact assessment should be carried out by the controller (. . .)

71)

prior to the processing in order to assess the particular likelihood and severity of the high risk.
taking into account the nature. scope. context and purposes of the processing and the sources
of the risk, which should include in particular the envisaged measures, safeguards and

mechanisms for mitigating that risk and for ensuring the protection of personal data and for

 

demonstrating the compliance with this Regulation.

This should in particular apply to (. . .) large-scale processing operations, which aim at

processing a considerable amount of personal data at regional, national or supranational level
and which could affect a large number of data subjects and which are likely to result in a high
risk. for example. on account of their sensitivity. where in accordance with the achieved state

of technological knowledge a new technology is used on a large scale as well as to other

 

processing operations which result in a high (. . .) risk for the rights and freedoms of data

 

 

subiects. in particular where those operations render it more difﬁcult for data subiects to

 

exercise their rights. A data protection impact assessment should also be made in cases where

data are processed for taking decisions regarding speciﬁc individuals following any

 

systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspects relating to natural persons based on

 

proﬁling those data or following the processing of special categories of personal data.

 

biometric data. or data on criminal convictions and offences or related security measures. A

 

data protection impact assessment is equally required for monitoring publicly accessible areas

on a large scale. especially when using optic-electronic devices or for any other operations

 

where the competent supervisory authority considers that the processing is likely to result in a

high risk for the rights and freedoms of data subiects, in particular because they prevent data

 

subiects from exercising a right or using a service or a contract. or because they are carried

 

out systematically on a large scale. The processing of (...) personal data irrespective of the

 

 

volume or the nature of the data, should not be considered as being on a large scale, if the

 

processing of these data is protected by professional secrecy (. . .), such as the processing of

 

personal data ﬁom patients or clients by an individual doctor, health care professional,

 

hospital or attorney. In these cases a data protection impact assessment should not be

 

mandatory.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 46
ANNEX DGD2C EN

72) There are circumstances under which it may be sensible and economic that the subject of a
data protection impact assessment should be broader than a single project, for example where
public authorities or bodies intend to establish a common application or processing platform
or where several controllers plan to introduce a common application or processing

environment across an industry sector or segment or for a widely used horizontal activity.

73) Data protection impact assessments may be carried out by a public authority or public body if
such an assessment has not already been made in the context of the adoption of the national
law on which the performance of the tasks of the public authority or public body is based and

which regulates the speciﬁc processing operation or set of operations in question.

74) Where a data protection impact assessment indicates that th_e processing would, despite the
envisaged safeguards. security measures and mechanisms to mitigate the risk. result in a high
risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals (. . .), and the controller is of the opinion that the

risk cannot be mitigated by reasonable means in terms of available technologies and costs of

 

implementation, the supervisory authority should be consulted, prior to the start of th_e

processing activities. Such high (. . .) risk is likely to result from certain types of data

 

processing and certain extent and frequency of processing which may result also in a
realisation of (. . .) damage or (. . .) interference with the rights and freedoms of the data
subiect. The supervisory authority should respond to the request for consultation in a deﬁned
period. However. the absence of a reaction of the supervisory authority within this period
should be without preiudice to any intervention of the supervisory authority in accordance

with its tasks and powers laid down in this Regulation. including the power to prohibit

 

processing operations. As part of this consultation process. the outcome of a data protection
impact assessment carried out with regard to the processing at issue pursuant to Article 33
may be submitted to the supervisory authority. in particular the measures envisaged to

mitigate the risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals.

 

74a) The processor should assist the controller. where necessary and upon request. in ensuring

 

compliance with the obligations deriving from the carrying out of data protection impact

assessments and from prior consultation of the supervisory authority.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 47
ANNEX DGD2C EN

74b) A consultation with the supervisory authority should also take place in the course of the
preparation of a legislative or regulatory measure which provides for the processing of
personal data (. . .). in order to ensure the compliance of the intended processing with this

Regulation and in particular to mitigate the risk involved for the data subiect.

75) Where the processing is carried out in the public sector or where, in the private sector,
processing is carried out by a large enterprise, or where its core activities, regardless of the

size of the enterprise, involve processing operations which require regular and systematic

 

monitoring, a person with expert knowledge of data protection law and practices may assist
the controller or processor to monitor internal compliance with this Regulation. Such data
protection ofﬁcers, whether or not an employee of the controller, should be in a position to

perform their duties and tasks in an independent manner.

76) Associations or other bodies representing categories of controllers or processors should be
encouraged to draw up codes of conduct, within the limits of this Regulation, so as to
facilitate the effective application of this Regulation, taking account of the speciﬁc

characteristics of the processing carried out in certain sectors and the speciﬁc needs of micro.

 

small and medium enterprises. In particular such codes of conduct could calibrate the
obligations of controllers and processors. taking into account the risk likely to result from the

processing for the rights and freedoms of individuals.

76a) When drawing up a code of conduct. or when amending or extending such a code.
associations and other bodies representing categories of controllers or processors should
consult with relevant stakeholders. including data subiects where feasible. and have regard to

submissions received and views expressed in response to such consultations.

77) In order to enhance transparency and compliance with this Regulation, the establishment of
certiﬁcation mechanisms, data protection seals and marks should be encouraged, allowing

data subjects to quickly assess the level of data protection of relevant products and services.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 48
ANNEX DGD2C EN

78)

79)

Cross-border ﬂows of personal data to and from countries outside the Union and international
organisations are necessary for the expansion of international trade and international co-
operation. The increase in these ﬂows has raised new challenges and concerns with respect to
the protection of personal data. However, when personal data are transferred from the Union

to controllers. processors or other recipients in third countries or to international

 

organisations, the level of protection of individuals guaranteed in the Union by this
Regulation should not be undermined. including in cases of onward transfers of personal data
from the third country or international organisation to controllers. processors in the same or71

another third country or international organisation. In any event, transfers to third countries

 

and international organisations may only be carried out in full compliance with this
Regulation. A transfer may only take place if. subiect to the other provisions of this

Regulation. the conditions laid down in Chapter V are complied with by the controller or

processor.

This Regulation is without prejudice to international agreements concluded between the
Union and third countries regulating the transfer of personal data including appropriate
safeguards for the data subjects. Member States may conclude international agreements which
involve the transfer of personal data to third countries or international organisations. as far as
such agreements do not affect this Regulation or any other provisions of EU law and include

safeguards to protect the rights of the data subiects72.

 

 

71

72

DE scrutiny reservation, in particular about the application of the rules of place of purchase
in relation to Article 89a.

FR requests the second sentence to be inserted in Article 89a. NL asked what was meant
with the new text and considered that it was necessary to keep it, but its purpose and
meaning should be clariﬁed. DE and UK scrutiny reservation on the new text. EE asked
whether if “aﬂect” means that it was not contradictory or something else.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 49
ANNEX DGD2C EN

80) The Commission may (. . .) decide with effect for the entire Union that certain third countries,
or a territory or a speciﬁed sector. such as the private sector or one or more speciﬁc economic
sectors within a third country, or an international organisation, offer an adequate level of data
protection, thus providing legal certainty and uniformity throughout the Union as regards the
third countries or international organisations, which are considered to provide such level of
protection. In these cases, transfers of personal data to these countries may take place without

needing to obtain any speciﬁc authorisation.

81) In line with the fundamental values on which the Union is founded, in particular the
protection of human rights, the Commission should, in its assessment of g third country Lof
a territory or of a speciﬁed sector within a third country. take into account how a given third
country respects the rule of law, access to justice as well as international human rights norms
and standards and its general and sectoral law. including legislation concerning public
security. defence and national security as well as public order and criminal law. The adoption
of an adequacy decision to a territory or a speciﬁed sector in a third country should take into
account clear and obiective criteria . such as speciﬁc processing activities and the scope of
applicable legal standards and legislation in force in the third country. The third country
should offer guarantees that ensure an adequate level of protection in particular when data are
processed in one or several speciﬁc sectors. In particular. the third country should ensure
effective data protection supervision and should provide for cooperation mechanisms with the
European data protection authorities. and the data subiects should be provided with effective

and enforceable rights and effective administrative and iudicial redress.E

 

73 The Presidency suggests this wording to take into account the DE request for Article

41(2)(c).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 50
ANNEX DGD2C EN

81a) Apart from the international commitments the third country or international organisation has

entered into the Commission should also take account of obligations arising from the third

 

 

country’s or international organisation’s participation in multilateral or regional systems in
particular in relation to the protection of personal data. as well as the implementation of such
obligations. In particular the third country’s accession to the Council of Europe Convention of
28 January 1981 for the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Automatic Processing of
Personal Data and its Additional Protocol should be taken into account. The Commission
should consult with the European Data Protection Board when assessing the level of

. . . . . . . . 74
protectlon 1n th1rd countr1es or 1nternat10nal organ1satlons .

81b) The Commission should monitor the functioning of decisions on the level of protection in a
third country or a territory or speciﬁed sector within a third country. or an international
organisation. including decisions adopted on the basis of Article 25(6) or Article 26 (4) of
Directive 95/46/EC. The Commission should evaluate. within a reasonable time. the
functioning of the latter decisions and report any pertinent ﬁndings to the Committee within
the meaning of Regulation USU) No 182/2011 as established under this Regulation.

82) The Commission may (. . .) recognise that a third country, or a territory or a speciﬁed sector
within a third country, or an international organisation (. . .) no longer ensures an adequate
level of data protection. Consequently the transfer of personal data to that third country g
international organisation should be prohibited. unless the requirements of Articles 42 to 44
are fulﬁlled. In that case, provision should be made for consultations between the

Commission and such third countries or international organisations. The Commission should.

 

in a timely manner. inform the third country or international organisation of the reasons and

enter into consultations with it in order to remedy the situation.

 

74 DE, supported by NL, proposed that the list of checks in Article 42(2) should include a new

component consisting of the participation of third states or international organisations in
international data-protection systems (e. g. APEC and ECOWAS). According to the position
of DE, although those systems are still in the early stages of practical implementation, the
draft Regulation should make allowance right away for the signiﬁcance they may gain in
future. Point (d) of Article 41(2) requires the systems to be fundamentally suited to ensuring
compliance with data protection standards.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 51
ANNEX DGD2C EN

83)

In the absence of an adequacy decision, the controller or processor should take measures to
compensate for the lack of data protection in a third country by way of appropriate safeguards
for the data subject. Such appropriate safeguards may consist of making use of binding
corporate rules, standard data protection clauses adopted by the Commission, standard data
protection clauses adopted by a supervisory authority or m contractual clauses authorised
by a supervisory authority, or other suitable and proportionate measures justiﬁed in the light
of all the circumstances surrounding a data transfer operation or set of data transfer operations

and where authorised by a supervisory authority. Those safeguards should ensure compliance

 

with data protection requirements and the rights of the data subiects. including the right to
obtain effective administrative or iudicial redress. They should relate in particular to
compliance with the general principles relating to personal data processing the availability of
enforceable data subiect's rights and of effective legal remedies and the principles of data
protection by design and by default. Transfers may be carried out also by public authorities or
bodies with public authorities or bodies in third countries or with international organisations
with corresponding duties or functions. including on the basis of provisions to be inserted into
administrative arrangements. such as a memorandum of understanding. The authorisation of
the competent supervisory authority should be obtained when the safeguards are adduced in

non legally binding administrative arrangements.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 52
ANNEX DGD2C EN

84) The possibility for the controller or processor to use standard data protection clauses adopted
by the Commission or by a supervisory authority should neither prevent the possibility for
controllers or processors to include the standard data protection clauses in a wider contract,
including in a contract between the processor and another processor. nor to add other clauses
or additional safeguards as long as they do not contradict, directly or indirectly, the standard
contractual clauses adopted by the Commission or by a supervisory authority or prejudice the

fundamental rights or freedoms of the data subjects.

85) A corporate group or a group of enterprises engaged in a ioint economic activity should be
able to make use of approved binding corporate rules for its international transfers from the
Union to organisations within the same corporate group of undertakings or group of
enterprises, as long as such corporate rules include essential principles and enforceable rights

to ensure appropriate safeguards for transfers or categories of transfers of personal data.

86) Provisions should be made for the possibility for transfers in certain circumstances where the
data subject has given his 611M consent, where the transfer is occasional in relation to a
contract or a legal claim, regardless of whether in a iudicial procedure or whether in an
administrative or any out-of-court procedure. including procedures before regulatory bodies.
Provision should also be made for the possibility for transfers where important grounds of
public interest laid down by Union or Member State law so require or where the transfer is
made from a register established by law and intended for consultation by the public or persons
having a legitimate interest. In this latter case such a transfer should not involve the entirety of
the data or entire categories of the data contained in the register and, when the register is
intended for consultation by persons having a legitimate interest, the transfer should be made

only at the request of those persons or if they are to be the recipients.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 53
ANNEX DGD2C EN

87)

These m should in particular apply to data transfers required and necessary for important
reasons of public interest, for example in cases of international data exchange (. . . .) between
competition authorities, between tax or customs administrations, between ﬁnancial
supervisory authorities, between services competent for social security matters m public
health, for example in case of contact tracing for contagious diseases or in order to reduce
and/or eliminate doping in sport (. . .). A transfer of personal data should equally be regarded
as lawful where it is necessary to protect an interest which is essential for the data subiect’s or
another person’s vital interests. including physical integrity or life. if the data subiect is
incapable of giving consent.75 In the absence of an adequacy decision. Union law or Member
State law may. for important reasons of public interest. expressly set limits to the transfer of
speciﬁc categories of data to a third country or an international organization. Member States
should notify such provisions to the Commission. Any transfer to an international
humanitarian organisation. such as a National Society of the Red Cross (...) or to the ICRC of
personal data of a data subiect who is physically or legally incapable of giving consent. with a
view to accomplishing a task incumbent upon the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement under the Geneva Conventions and/or to work for the faithful application of
international humanitarian law applicable in armed conﬂicts could be considered as necessary

for an important reason of public interest or being in the vital interest of the data subiect.

 

75

FR referred to the situation of a recipient of the transfer who is a medical professional or
has adduced provisions ensuring the respect of the data subject's right to privacy and
medical conﬁdentiality. PRES considers that this could be further addressed in the context
of Chapter IX.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 54
ANNEX DGD2C EN

88) Transfers which cannot be qualiﬁed as large scale or frequent, could also be possible for the
purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or the processor, when those
interests are not overridden by the interests or rights and freedoms of the data subiect and

when the controller or the processor has assessed all the circumstances surrounding the data

 

transfer. The controller or processor should give particular consideration to the nature of the
data. the purpose and duration of the proposed processing operation or operations. as well as
the situation in the country of origin. the third country and the country of ﬁnal destination.
and adduced suitable safeguards to protect fundamental rights and freedoms of natural

persons with respect to processing of their personal data. For the purposes of processing for

 

historical, statistical and scientiﬁc research purposes, the legitimate expectations of society for
an increase of knowledge should be taken into consideration. To assess whether a transfer is
large scale or frequent the amount of personal data and number of data subiects should be

taken into account and whether the transfer takes place on an occasional or regular basis.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 55
ANNEX DGD2C EN

89)

90)

91)

In any case, where the Commission has taken no decision on the adequate level of data
protection in a third country, the controller or processor should make use of solutions that
provide data subjects with a guarantee that they will continue to beneﬁt from the fundamental
rights and safeguards as regards processing of their data in the Union once this data has been

transferred.

Some third countries enact laws, regulations and other legislative instruments which purport
to directly regulate data processing activities of natural and legal persons under the
jurisdiction of the Member States. The extraterritorial application of these laws, regulations
and other legislative instruments may be in breach of international law and may impede the
attainment of the protection of individuals guaranteed in the Union by this Regulation.
Transfers should only be allowed where the conditions of this Regulation for a transfer to
third countries are met. This may inter alia be the case where the disclosure is necessary for
an important ground of public interest recognised in Union law or in a Member State law to

which the controller is subject. (. . .)

When personal data moves across borders outside the Union it may put at increased risk the
ability of individuals to exercise data protection rights in particular to protect themselves from
the unlawful use or disclosure of that information. At the same time, supervisory authorities
may ﬁnd that they are unable to pursue complaints or conduct investigations relating to the
activities outside their borders. Their efforts to work together in the cross-border context may
also be hampered by insufﬁcient preventative or remedial powers, inconsistent legal regimes,
and practical obstacles like resource constraints. Therefore, there is a need to promote closer
co-operation among data protection supervisory authorities to help them exchange
information and carry out investigations with their international counterparts. FLthe
purposes of developing international co-operation mechanisms to facilitate and provide

international mutual assistance for the enforcement of legislation for the protection of

 

personal data. the Commission and the supervisory authorities should exchange information

 

and cooperate in activities related to the exercise of their powers with competent authorities in
third countries. based on reciprocity and in compliance with the provisions of this Regulation.

including those laid down in Chapter V.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 56
ANNEX DGD2C EN

92) The establishment of supervisory authorities in Member States, empowered to perform their
m and exercise their 1% with complete independence, is an essential component of the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of their personal data. Member States
may establish more than one supervisory authority, to reﬂect their constitutional,

organisational and administrative structure.

92a) The independence of supervisory authorities should not mean that the supervisory authorities
cannot be subiected to control or monitoring mechanism regarding their ﬁnancial expenditure.

Neither does it imply that supervisory authorities cannot be subiected to iudicial review.

93) Where a Member State establishes several supervisory authorities, it should establish by law
mechanisms for ensuring the effective participation of those supervisory authorities in the
consistency mechanism. That Member State should in particular designate the supervisory
authority which functions as a single contact point for the effective participation of those
authorities in the mechanism, to ensure swift and smooth co-operation with other supervisory

authorities, the European Data Protection Board and the Commission.

94) Each supervisory authority should be provided with the (. . .) ﬁnancial and human resources,
premises and infrastructure, which E necessary for the effective performance of their tasks,
including for the tasks related to mutual assistance and co-operation with other supervisory

authorities throughout the Union. Each supervisory authority should have a separate annual

 

budget. which may be part of the overall state or national budget.

95) The general conditions for the member or members of the supervisory authority should be laid
down by law in each Member State and should in particular provide that those members
should be either appointed by the parliament Mor the government or the head of State of the
Member State or by an independent body entrusted by Member State law with the
appointment by means of a transparent procedure. In order to ensure the independence of the
supervisory authority. the member or members should refrain from any action incompatible
with their duties and should not. during their term of ofﬁce. engage in any incompatible

occupation. whether gainful or not. (. . .).

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 57
ANNEX DGD2C EN

95a) Each supervisory authority should be competent on the territory of its own Member State to
exercise the powers and to perform the tasks conferred on it in accordance with this
Regulation. This should cover in particular the processing in the context of the activities of an
establishment of the controller or processor on the territory of its own Member State. the
processing of personal data carried out by public authorities or private bodies acting in the
public interest. processing affecting data subiects on its territory or processing carried out by a
controller or processor not established in the European Union when targeting data subiects
residing in its territogy. This should include dealing with complaints lodged by a data subject,
conducting investigations on the application of the Regulation, promoting public awareness of

the risks, rules, safeguards and rights in relation to the processing of personal data.

96) The supervisory authorities should monitor the application of the provisions pursuant to this
Regulation and contribute to its consistent application throughout the Union, in order to
protect natural persons in relation to the processing of their personal data and to facilitate the
free ﬂow of personal data within the internal market. For that purpose, this Regulation should
oblige and empower the supervisory authorities to co-operate with each other and the
Commission, without the need for any agreement between Member States on the provision of

mutual assistance or on such cooperation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 58
ANNEX DGD2C EN

97)

97a)

Where the processing of personal data takes place in the context of the activities of an
establishment of a controller or processor in the Union and the controller or processor is
established in more than one Member State. or where processing taking place in the context of
the activities of a single establishment of a controller or processor in the Union substantially
affects or is likely to substantially affect data subiects in more than one Member State. th_e
supervisory authority for the main establishment of the controller or processor or for the
single establishment of the controller or processor should act as lead authority. It should
cooperate with the other authorities that are concerned. because the controller or processor has
an establishment on the territory of their Member State. because data subiects residing on
their territory are substantially affected. or because a complaint has been lodged with them.
Also where a data subiect not residing in that Member State has lodged a complaint. the
supervisory authority to which such complaint has been lodged should also be a concerned
supervisory authority. Within its tasks to issue guidelines on any question covering the
application of this Regulation. the European Data Protection Board may issue guidelines in
particular on the criteria to be taken into account in order to ascertain whether the processing
in question substantially affects data subiects in more than one Member State and on what

. . . 76
const1tutes a relevant and reasoned ObieCtIOI’I—.

The lead authority should be competent to adopt binding decisions regarding measures
applying the powers conferred on it in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. In
its capacity as lead authority. the supervisory authority should closely involve and coordinate
the concerned supervisory authorities in the decision-making process. In cases where the
decisions is to reiect the complaint by the data subiect in whole or in part that decision should

be adopted by the supervisory authority at which the complaint has been lodged.

 

76

DE proposal; CZ and LU scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 59
ANNEX DGD2C EN

97b) The decision should be agreed iointly by the lead supervisory authority and the concerned
supervisory authorities and should be directed towards the main or single establishment of the
controller or processor and be binding on the controller and processor. The controller or
processor should take the necessary measures to ensure the compliance with this Regulation
and the implementation of the decision notiﬁed by the lead supervisory authority to the main

establishment of the controller or processor as regards the processing activities in the Union.

97c) Each supervisory authority (. . .) not acting as lead supervisory authority should be competent
to deal with ( . . .) local cases where the controller or processor is established in more than one
Member State. but the subiect matter of the speciﬁc processing concerns only processing
carried out in a single Member State and involving only data subiects in that single Member
State. for example. where the subiect matter concerns the processing of employees data in the
speciﬁc employment context of a Member State. In such cases. the supervisory authority
should inform the lead supervisory authority without delay on this matter. After being
informed. the lead supervisory authority should decide. whether it will deal with the case
within the one-stop-shop mechanism or whether the supervisory authority which informed it
should deal with the case at local level. When deciding whether it will deal with the case. the
lead supervisory authority should take into account. whether there is an establishment of the
controller or processor in the Member State of the supervisory authority which informed it. in
order to ensure effective enforcement of a decision vis-a-vis the controller or processor.
Where the lead supervisory authority decides to deal with the case. the supervisory authority
which informed it should have the possibility to submit a draft for a decision. of which the
lead supervisory authority should take utmost account when preparing its draft decision in the

one-stop-shop mechanism.

 

E) The rules on the lead supervisory authority and the one-stop-shop mechanism should not
apply where the processing is carried out by public authorities or private bodies acting in the
public interest. In such cases the only supervisory authority competent to exercise the powers
conferred to it in accordance with this Regulation should be the supervisory authority of the

Member State where the public authority or private body is established.

99) (...)

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 60
ANNEX DGD2C EN

100) In order to ensure consistent monitoring and enforcement of this Regulation throughout the
Union, the supervisory authorities should have in each Member State the same tasks and
effective powers, including powers of investigation, corrective powers and sanctions, ad

authorisation and advisory powers. particularly in cases of complaints from individuals, and

 

without preiudice to the powers of prosecutorial authorities under national law. to bring

 

infringements of this Regulation to the attention of the iudicial authorities and/g engage in

 

legal proceedings. Such powers should also include the power to forbid the processing on

 

which the authority is consulted. Member States may specify other tasks related to the

 

protection of personal data under this Regulation. The powers of supervisory authorities (. . .)

should be exercised in conformity with appropriate procedural safeguards set out in Union

 

law and national law, impartially. fairly and within a reasonable time. In particular each

 

measure should be appropriate. necessary and proportionate in view of ensuring compliance

 

with this Regulation. taking into account the circumstances of each individual case. respect

 

the right of every person to be heard before any individual measure which would affect him or

 

her adversely is taken and avoid superﬂuous costs and excessive inconveniences for the

 

persons concerned. Investigatory powers as regards access to premises should be exercised in

 

accordance with speciﬁc requirements in national procedural law. such as the requirement to

 

obtain a prior iudicial authorisation.

 

Each legally binding measure of the supervisory authority should be in writing be clear and

 

unambiguous. indicate the supervisory authority which has issued the measure. the date of

 

issue of the measure. bear the signature of the head. or a member of the supervisory authority

 

authorised by him or her. give the reasons for the measure. and refer to the right of an

 

effective remedy. This should not preclude additional requirements pursuant to national

 

procedural law. The adoption of such legally binding decision implies that it may give rise to

 

iudicial review in the Member State of the supervisory authority that adopted the decision.

 

101) (...).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 61
ANNEX DGD2C EN

101a)Where the supervisory authority to which the complaint has been lodged is not the lead
supervisory authority. the lead supervisory authority should closely co-operate with the
supervisory authority to which the complaint has been lodged according to the provisions on
co-operation and consistency laid down in this Regulation. In such cases. the lead supervisory
authority should. when taking measures intended to produce legal effects. including the
imposition of administrative ﬁnes. take utmost account of the view of the supervisory
authority to which the complaint has been lodged and which should remain competent to
carry out any investigation on the territory of its own Member State in liaison with the

competent supervisory authority.

101b)The supervisory authority receiving a complaint or detecting or being informed otherwise of
situations that entail possible infringements of the Regulation should seek an amicable
settlement and. if this proves unsuccessful. exercise its full range of powers in cases where
another supervisory authority should act as a lead supervisory authority for the processing
activities of the controller or processor but the concrete subiect matter of a complaint or the
possible infringement concerns only processing activities of the controller or processor in the
one Member State where the complaint has been lodged or the possible infringement detected
and the matter does not substantially affect or is not likely to substantially affect data subiects
in other Member States. This should include speciﬁc processing carried out in the territory of
the Member State of the supervisory authority or with regard to data subiects on the territory
of that Member State: or to processing that is carried out in the context of an offer of goods or
services speciﬁcally aimed at data subiects in the territory of the Member State of the
supervisory authority: or that has to be assessed taking into account relevant legal obligations

under national law.

102) Awareness raising activities by supervisory authorities addressed to the public should include
speciﬁc measures directed at controllers and processors, including micro, small and medium-

sized enterprises, as well as individuals in particular in the educational context.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 62
ANNEX DGD2C EN

103)

104)

105)

The supervisory authorities should assist each other in performing their M and provide
mutual assistance, so as to ensure the consistent application and enforcement of this
Regulation in the internal market. Where a supervisory authority requesting mutual assistance.
in the case of no response of the requested supervisory authority within one month of
receiving the request. adopts a provisional measure. such provisional measure should be duly

iustiﬁed and only of a temporary nature.

 

Each supervisory authority should have the right to participate in joint operations between
supervisory authorities. The requested supervisory authority should be obliged to respond to

the request in a deﬁned time period.

In order to ensure the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union, a
consistency mechanism for co-operation between the supervisory authorities (. . .) should be
established. This mechanism should in particular apply where a supervisory authority intends

to adopt a measure intended to produce legal effects as regards processing operations which

 

substantially affect a signiﬁcant number of data subjects in several Member States (. . .). It
should also apply where any concerned_supervisory authority or the Commission77 requests
that such matter should be dealt with in the consistency mechanism. This mechanism should
be without prejudice to any measures that the Commission may take in the exercise of its

powers under the Treaties.

 

77

HU reservation on the reference to the Commission.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 63
ANNEX DGD2C EN

106) In application of the consistency mechanism, the European Data Protection Board should,
within a determined period of time, issue an opinion, if a (. . .) majority of its members so
decides or if so requested by any concerned_supervisory authority_or the Commission. T_he
European Data Protection Board should also be empowered to adopt legally binding decisions
in case of disputes between supervisory authorities. For that purposes it should issue. in
principle with a two-third majority of its members. legally binding decisions in clearly
deﬁned cases where there are conﬂicting views among supervisory authorities in particular in
the cooperation mechanism between the lead supervisory authority and concerned supervisory

authorities on the merits of the case. notably whether there is an infringement of this

Regulation or not.

107) (...)

108) There may be an urgent need to act in order to protect the rights and freedoms of data
subjects, in particular when the danger exists that the enforcement of a right of a data subject
could be considerably impeded. Therefore, a supervisory authority should be able to adopt
provisional measures with a speciﬁed period of validity when applying the consistency

mechanism.

109) The application of this mechanism should be a condition for the lawfulness of a measure

intended to produce legal effects by a supervisory authority in those cases where its

 

application is mandatory. In other cases of cross-border relevance, the cooperation mechanism
between the lead supervisory authority and concerned supervisory authorities should be
applied and mutual assistance and joint operations might be carried out between the
concerned supervisory authorities on a bilateral or multilateral basis without triggering the

consistency mechanism.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 64
ANNEX DGD2C EN

110) In order to promote the consistent application of this Regulation. the European Data

 

Protection Board should be set up as an independent body of the Union. To fulﬁl its
obiectives. the European Data Protection Board should have legal personality. The European

Data Protection Board should be represented by its Chair. It should replace the Working Party

 

on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data established by
Directive 95/46/EC. It should consist of a head of a supervisory authority of each Member

State or his or her representative (. . .). The Commission and the European Data Protection

 

Supervisor should participate in its activities without voting rights. The European Data
Protection Board should contribute to the consistent application of this Regulation throughout
the Union, including by advising the Commission, in particular on the level of protection in

third countries or international organisations. and promoting co-operation of the supervisory

 

authorities throughout the Union. The European Data Protection Board should act

independently when exercising its tasks.

110a) The European Data Protection Board should be assisted by a secretariat provided by the
secretariat of the European Data Protection Supervisor. The staff of the secretariat of the
European Data Protection Supervisor involved in carrying out the tasks conferred on the
European Data Protection Board by this Regulation should perform its tasks exclusively under

the instructions of. and report to the Chair of the European Data Protection Board.

 

Organisational separation of staff should concern all services needed for the independent

functioning of the European Data Protection Board.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 65
ANNEX DGD2C EN

111) Every data subiect should have the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority. in

112)

particular in the Member State of his or her habitual residence . and have the right to an
effective iudicial remedy in accordance with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
if the data subiect considers that his or her rights under this Regulation are infringed or where
the supervisory authority does not act on a complaint partially or wholly reiects or dismisses
a complaint or does not act where such action is necessary to protect the rights of the data
subiect. The investigation following a complaint should be carried out. subiect to iudicial
review. to the extent that is appropriate in the speciﬁc case. The supervisory authority should
inform the data subiect of the progress and the outcome of the complaint within a reasonable
period. If the case requires further investigation or coordination with another supervisory
authority. intermediate information should be given to the data subiect. In order to facilitate
the submission of complaints. each supervisory authority should take measures such as
providing a complaint submission form which can be completed also electronically. without

. . . 78
excluding other means of commumcatlon. —

 

Where a data subiect considers that his or her rights under this Regulation are infringed. he or
she should have the right to mandate a body. organisation or association which aims to protect
the rights and interests of data subiects in relation to the protection of their data and is
constituted according to the law of a Member State. to lodge a complaint on his or her behalf
with a supervisory authority or exercise the right to a iudicial remedy on behalf of data
subiects. Member States may provide that such a body. organisation or association should
have the right to lodge. independently of a data subiect's mandate. in such Member State a
complaint and/or have the right to an effective iudicial remedy where it has reasons to
consider that ( . . .) the rights of a data subiect have been infringed as a result of the processing
of personal data which is not in compliance with this Regulation. This body. organisation or

association may not be allowed to claim compensation on a data subiect's behalf.E

 

78

79

F1 suggested to insert a footnote to accommodate its concern that inaction on behalf of an
authority was unknown in their legal system, with the following wording: 'In a case of
inaction by the supervisory authority under art. 74(2), an effective judicial remedy may be
provided by courts, tribunals or other kind of judicial bodies, such as the Chancellor of
Justice or the Parliamentary Ombudsman, as far as such remedy will factually lead to
appropriate measures.‘

NL suggestion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 66
ANNEX DGD2C EN

113) Any natural or legal person has the right to bring an action for annulment of decisions of the

 

European Data Protection Board before the Court of Justice of the European Union (the

 

"Court of Justice") under the conditions provided for in Article 263 TFEU. As addressees of

 

such decisions. the concerned supervisory authorities who wish to challenge them. have to

 

bring action within two months of their notiﬁcation to them. in accordance with Article 263

 

TFEU. Where decisions of the European Data Protection Board are of direct and individual

 

concern to a controller. processor or the complainant. the latter may bring an action for

 

annulment against those decisions and they should do so within two months of their

 

publication on the website of the European Data Protection Board. in accordance with Article

263 TFEU. Without prejudice to this right under Article 263 TFEU. each natural or legal

 

 

person should have an effective iudicial remedy before the competent national court against a

 

decision of a supervisory authority which produces legal effects concerning this person. Such

 

a decision concerns in particular the exercise of investigative. corrective and authorisation

 

powers by the supervisory authority or the dismissal or reiection of complaints“. However.

 

this right does not encompass other measures of supervisory authorities which are not legally

 

binding such as opinions issued by or advice provided by the supervisory authority.

 

Proceedings against a supervisory authority should be brought before the courts of the

 

Member State where the supervisory authority is established and should be conducted in

 

accordance with the national procedural law of that Member State. Those courts should

 

exercise full iurisdiction which should include iurisdiction to examine all questions of fact and

 

law relevant to the dispute before it. Where a complaint has been reiected or dismissed by a

 

supervisory authority. the complainant may bring proceedings to the courts in the same

 

Member State. In the context of iudicial remedies relating to the application of this

 

Regulation. national courts which consider a decision on the question necessary to enable

 

them to give iudgment. may. or in the case provided for in Article 267 TFEU. must. request

 

the Court of Justice to give a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of Union law including

 

this Regulation.

 

80 -
GR reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 67
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Furthermore. where a decision of a supervisory authority implementing a decision of the
European Data Protection Board is challenged before a national court and the validity of the
decision of the European Data Protection Board is at issue. that national court does not have
the power to declare the European Data Protection Board's decision invalid but must refer the
question of validity to the Court of Justice in accordance with Article 267 TFEU as
interpreted by the Court of Justice in the Foto-frost case8'. whenever it considers the decision
invalid. However. a national court may not refer a question on the validity of the decision of
the European Data Protection Board at the request of a natural or legal person which had the
opportunity to bring an action for annulment of that decision. in particular if it was directly

and individually concerned by that decision. but had not done so within the period laid down

by Article 263 TFEU.

113a)Where a court seized with a proceeding against a decision of a supervisory authority has
reason to believe that proceedings concerning the same processing such as the same subiect
matter as regards processing of the same controller or processor activities or the same cause of
action are brought before a competent court in another Member State. it should contact that
court in order to conﬁrm the existence of such related proceedings. If related proceedings are
pending before a court in another Member State. any court other than the court ﬁrst seized
may stay its proceedings or may. on request of one of the parties. decline iurisdiction in
favour of the court ﬁrst seized if the latter has iurisdiction over the proceedings in question
and its law permits the consolidation of such related proceedings. Proceedings are deemed to
be related where they are so closely connected that it is expedient to hear and determine them

together to avoid the risk of irreconcilable iudgments resulting from separate proceedings.

114) (...)

115) (...)

 

8’ Case C-314/85.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 68
ANNEX DGD2C EN

116) For proceedings against a controller or processor. the plaintiff should have the choice to bring

the action before the courts of the Member States where the controller or processor has an
establishment or where the data subiect resides. unless the controller is a public authority

acting in the exercise of its public powers.

117) (...).Q

118) Any damage which a person may suffer as a result of a processing that is not in compliance

with this Regulation should be compensated by the controller or processor. who should be
exempted from liability if they prove that they are not in any way responsible for the damage
(. . .). The concept of damage should be broadly interpreted in the light of the case law of the
Court of Justice of the European Union in a manner which fully reﬂects the obiectives of this
Regulation. This is without preiudice to any claims for damage deriving from the violation of
other rules in Union or Member State law“. (...)

When reference is made to a processing that is not in compliance with this Regulation it also
covers processing that is not in compliance with delegated and implementing acts adopted in

accordance with this Regulation and national law specifying rules of this Regulation.

 

82

83

FR suggested to insert a footnote on contractual clauses as follows: 'Any contractual clause
which is not compliant with the right to an effective judicial remedy against a controller or
processor, and in particular with the right of the data subject to bring proceedings before the
courts of the Member State of its habitual residence shall be null and void.'

COM scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 69
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Where controllers or processors are involved in the same processing each controller or

 

processor should be held liable for the whole damage. They may be ioined to the same

 

iudicial proceedings. in accordance with national law. In that case compensation may be

 

apportioned according to the responsibility of each controller or processor for the damage

 

caused by the processing on condition that full and effective compensation of the data subiect

 

who suffered the damage is ensured. Any controller or processor who has paid full

 

compensation. may subsequently institute recourse proceedings against other controllers or

 

. . . 84
processors involved in the same process1ng.—

 

118a)Where speciﬁc rules on iurisdiction are contained in this Regulation. in particular as regards

 

proceedings seeking a iudicial remedy including compensation. against a controller or

 

processor. general iurisdiction rules such as those of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 should

 

not preiudice the application of such speciﬁc rules.

 

 

8" EL wanted to delete the last sentence.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 70
ANNEX DGD2C EN

118b)In order to strengthen the enforcement of the rules of this Regulation. penalties and

 

administrative ﬁnes85 may be imposed for any infringement of the Regulation. in addition to.

 

or instead of appropriate measures imposed by the supervisory authority pursuant to this

 

Regulation. In a case of a minor infringement or if the ﬁne likely to be imposed would

 

constitute an disproportionate burden to a natural person. a reprimand may be issued instead

 

of a ﬁnes. Due regard should however be given to the nature. gravity and duration of the

 

infringement, the intentional character of the infringement. actions taken to mitigate the

 

damage suffered . degree of responsibility or any relevant previous inﬁingements, the manner

 

in which the infringement became known to the supervisory authority. compliance with

 

measures ordered against the controller or processor. adherence to a code of conduct and any

 

other aggravating or mitigating factor 86 The imposition of penalties and administrative ﬁnes

 

should be subiect to adequate procedural safeguards in conformity with general principles of

 

Union law and the Charter of Fundamental Rights. including effective iudicial protection and

 

due process. Where the national law of a Member State does not provide for administrative

 

ﬁnes. such Member State may abstain from providing administrative ﬁnes for infringements

 

of this Regulation that are already subiect to criminal sanctions in their national law ensuring

 

that these criminal sanctions are effective. proportionate and dissuasive, taking into account

 

the level of administrative ﬁnes provided for in this Regulation.

 

 

85

DK reservation on the introduction of administrative ﬁnes in the text as administrative ﬁnes
— irrespective of their level — raise constitutional concerns.
Further to F1 proposal. FR wanted to delete the text of this suggestion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 71
ANNEX DGD2C EN

119) Member States may lay down the rules on criminal sanctions for infringements of this
Regulation. including for infringements of national rules adopted pursuant to and within the
limits of this Regulation. These criminal sanctions may also allow for the deprivation of the
proﬁts obtained through infringements of this Regulation. However. the imposition of
criminal sanctions for infringements of such national rules and of administrative sanctions
should not lead to the breach of the principle of ne bis in idem, as interpreted by the Court of

Justice.

120) In order to strengthen and harmonise administrative penalties against infringements of this
Regulation. each supervisory authority should have the power to impose administrative ﬁnes.
This Regulation should indicate offences. the upper limit and criteria for ﬁxing the related
administrative ﬁnes. which should be determined by the competent supervisory authority in
each individual case. taking into account all relevant circumstances of the speciﬁc situation.
with due regard in particular to the nature. gravity and duration of the breach and of its
consequences and the measures taken to ensure compliance with the obligations under the
Regulation and to prevent or mitigate the consequences of the infringement. Where the ﬁnes
are imposed on persons that are not a commercial undertaking the supervisory authority
should take account of the general level of income in the Member State in considering the
appropriate amount of ﬁne”. The consistency mechanism may also be used to promote a
consistent application of administrative ﬁnes. It should be for the Member States to determine
whether and to which extent public authorities should be subiect to administrative ﬁnes.
Imposing an administrative ﬁne or giving a warning does not affect the application of other

powers of the supervisory authorities or of other sanctions under the Regulation.

120a)Where this Regulation does not harmonise administrative penalties or where necessary in
other cases. for example in cases of serious infringements of the Regulation”. Member States
should implement a system which provides for effective. proportionate and dissuasive
penalties. The nature of such penalties (criminal or administrative) should be determined by

national law.

 

87

Further to CZ proposal. FR wanted to delete the text of the CZ suggestion.
88

IE thought that it was not necessary to have additional conditions like 'serious'
infringements.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 72
ANNEX DGD2C EN

121) Member States law should reconcile the rules governing freedom of expression and
information. including ioumalistic. academic. artistic and or literary expression with the right
to the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. The processing of personal data
for iournalistic purposes. or for the purposes of academic. artistic or literary expression should
be subiect to derogations or exemptions from certain provisions of this Regulation if
necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data. with the right to freedom of
expression and information. as guaranteed by Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union. This should apply in particular to processing of personal data in the
audiovisual ﬁeld and in news archives and press libraries. Therefore. Member States should
adopt legislative measures. which should lay down exemptions and derogations which are
necessary for the purpose of balancing these fundamental rights. Such exemptions and
derogations should be adopted by the Member States on general principles. on the rights of
the data subiect. on controller and processor. on the transfer of data to third countries or
international organisations. on the independent supervisory authorities. on co-operation and
consistency. In case these exemptions or derogations differ from one Member State to
another. the national law of the Member State to which the controller is subiect should apply.
In order to take account of the importance of the right to freedom of expression in every
democratic society, it is necessary to interpret notions relating to that freedom, such as

journalism, broadly. (. . .)

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 73
ANNEX DGD2C EN

MThis Regulation allows the principle of public access to oﬁ‘icial documents to be taken into
account when applying the provisions set out in this Regulation. Public access to ofﬁcial
documents may be considered as a public interest. Personal data in documents held by a
public authority or a public body should be able to be publicly disclosed by this authority or
body if the disclosure is provided for by Union law or Member State law to which the public
authority or public body is subject. Such laws should reconcile public access to ofﬁcial
documents and the reuse of public sector information with the right to the protection of
personal data and may therefore provide for the necessary derogations ﬁom the rules of this
regulation. The reference to public authorities and bodies should in this context include all
authorities or other bodies covered by Member State law on public access to documents.
Directive 2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of I 7 November 2003
on the re-use of public sector information leaves intact and in no way affects the level of
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data under the provisions
of Union and national law, and in particular does not alter the obligations and rights set out
in this Regulation. In particular, that Directive should not apply to documents access to which
is excluded or restricted by virtue of the access regimes on the grounds of protection of
personal data, and parts of documents accessible by virtue of those regimes which contain
personal data the re-use of which has been deﬁned by law as being incompatible with the law

concerning the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data89._
122) (.”)99

123) (.”)93

 

Moved from recital 18.
Moved to recital 42a.
Moved to recital 42b.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 74
ANNEX DGD2C EN

124) National law or collective agreements (including 'works agreements')92 may provide for

speciﬁc rules on the processing of employees' personal data in the employment context, in

 

particular for the purposes of the recruitment, the performance of the contract of employment,

 

including discharge of obligations laid down by law or by collective agreements,

 

management, planning and organisation of work, equality and diversity in the workplace ,

health and safety at work, and for the purposes of the exercise and enjoyment, on an

 

individual or collective basis, of rights and beneﬁts related to employment, and for the

 

purpose of the termination of the employment relationship.

 

125)93 The processing of personal data for historical, statistical or scientiﬁc (. . .) purposes w
for archiving purposes in the public interest (. . .) should, in addition to the general principles
and speciﬁc rules of this Regulation, in particular as regards the conditions for lawful
processing, also comply with respect other relevant legislation such as on clinical trials. The
m processing of personal data for historical, statistical and scientiﬁc purposes m
archiving purposes in the public interest (. . .) should not be considered incompatible with the
purposes for which the data are initially collected and may be processed for those purposes for

a longer period than necessary for that initial purpose (. . .). Member States should be

 

authorised to provide. under speciﬁc conditions and in the presence of appropriate safeguards
for data subiects. speciﬁcations and derogations to the information requirements and the rights
to access. rectiﬁcation. erasure. to be forgotten, restriction of processing and on the right to
data portability and the right to obiect when processing personal data for historical. statistical

or scientiﬁc purposes and for archiving purposes (. . .) The conditions and safeguards in

 

question may entail speciﬁc procedures for data subiects to exercise those rights if this is
appropriate in the light of the purposes sought by the speciﬁc processing along with technical
and organisational measures aimed at minimising the processing of personal data in pursuance

of the proportionality and necessity principles.

125a)(...)94.

 

92
93

DE proposal.
AT: reservation
94 Moved to recitals 126c and 126d.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 75
ANNEX DGD2C EN

125aa)By coupling information from registries. researchers can obtain new knowledge of great

 

value when it comes to e. g. widespread diseases as cardiovascular disease. cancer.

depression etc. On the basis of registries. research results can be—enhanced. as they draw

 

on a larger population. Within social science. research on the basis of registries enables

 

researchers to obtain essential knowledge about long-term impact of a number of social

 

conditions e. g. unemployment. education. and the coupling of this information to other

 

life conditions. Research results obtained on the basis of registries provide solid. high
quality knowledge. which can provide the basis for the formulation and implementation

of knowledge-based policy. improve the quality of life for a number of people. and

 

improve the efﬁciency of social services etc.

 

In order to facilitate scientiﬁc research. personal data can be processed for scientiﬁc

 

purposes subiect to appropriate conditions and safeguards set out in Member State or
Union law. Hence consent from the data subiect should not be necessary for each further

processing for scientiﬁc purposes.

 

125b) 'The importance of archives for the understanding of the history and culture of Europe'—and

 

'that well-kept and accessible archives contribute to the democratic function of our societies'.

 

were underlined by Council Resolution of 6 May 2003 on archives in the Member States95.
Where personal data are processed for archiving purposes. this Regulation should also apply

to that processing bearing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to deceased persons.

 

Public authorities or public or private bodies that hold records of public interest should be

 

services which. pursuant to Union or Member State law. have a legal obligation to acquire.

 

preserve. appraise. arrange. describe. communicate. promote. disseminate and provide access
to records of enduring value for general public interest. Member States should also be
authorised to provide that personal data may be further processed for archiving purposes. for

example with a view to providing speciﬁc information related to the political behaviour under

 

. . . 96
former totalitarian state regimes ;

 

 

95 OJC 113, 13.5.2003, p. 2.
9" CZ reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 76
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Codes of conduct may contribute to the proper application of this Regulation, including when
personal data are processed for archiving purposes in the public interest by further specifying
appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the data subject”. Such codes should be

drafted by Member States' ofﬁcial archives or by the European Archives Group. Regarding

 

international transfers of personal data included in archives. these must take place without

 

preiudice of the applying European and national rules for the circulation of cultural goods and

 

national treasures.

 

126) Where personal data are processed for scientiﬁc purposes. this Regulation should also apply

to that processing. For the purposes of this Regulation. processing of personal data for

 

scientiﬁc purposes should include fundamental research. applied research. privately funded

 

research98 and in addition should take into account the Union's obiective under Article 179(1)

 

of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union of achieving a European Research

 

Area. Scientiﬁc purposes should also include studies conducted in the public interest in the

 

area of public health. To meet the speciﬁcities of processing personal data for scientiﬁc

 

purposes speciﬁc conditions should apply in particular as regards the publication or otherwise

 

disclosure of personal data in the context of scientiﬁc purposes. If the result of scientiﬁc

 

research in particular in the health context gives reason for further measures in the interest of

 

the data subiect. the general rules of this Regulation should apply in view of those measuresﬂ.

 

 

97 oz, FI, HU, FR, MT, NL, PT, RO, SE, SI and UK scrutiny reservation.
98 AT and SE scrutiny reservation.
99 CZ, DK, FI, FR, HU, MT, NL, PT, SE, SI and UK scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 77
ANNEX DGD2C EN

126a) Where personal data are processed for historical purposes. this Regulation should also apply
to that processing. This should also include historical research and research for genealogical

purposes. bearing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to deceased persons..

126b) For the purpose of consenting to the participation in scientiﬁc research activities in clinical
trials (. . .) the relevant provisions of Regulation USU) No. 536/2014 of the European

Parliament and of the Council should apply.

126C) Where personal data are processed for statistical purposes. this Regulation should apply to
that processing. Union law or Member State law should, within the limits of this Regulation,
determine statistical content, control of access, speciﬁcations for the processing of personal
data for statistical purposes and appropriate measures to safeguard the rights and ﬁeedoms

of the data subject and for guaranteeing statistical conﬁdentiality.

126d) The conﬁdential information which the Union and national statistical authorities collect for
the production of ofﬁcial European and ofﬁcial national statistics should be protected
European statistics should be developed, produced and disseminated in conformity with the
statistical principles as set out in Article 338(2) of the Treaty of the Functioning of the
European Union, while national statistics should also comply with national law.
Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of I I March
2009 on European statistics and repealing Regulation (EC, Euratom) No I I 01/2008 of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the transmission of data subject to statistical
conﬁdentiality to the Statistical Ofﬁce of the European Communities, Council Regulation
(EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, and Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom

100

establishing a Committee on the Statistical Programmes of the European C ommunities—

provides ﬁtrther speciﬁcations on statistical conﬁdentiality for European statistics.

 

1"" OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164—173.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 78
ANNEX DGD2C EN

127)

128)

129)

As regards the powers of the supervisory authorities to obtain from the controller or processor
access personal data and access to its premises, Member States may adopt by law, within the
limits of this Regulation, speciﬁc rules in order to safeguard the professional or other
equivalent secrecy obligations, in so far as necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of
personal data with an obligation of professional secrecy. This is without preiudice to existing

Member State obligations to adopt professional secrecy where required by Union law.

This Regulation respects and does not prejudice the status under existing constitutional law of
churches and religious associations or communities in the Member States, as recognised in

Article 17 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. (...).

In order to fulﬁl the objectives of this Regulation, namely to protect the fundamental rights
and freedoms of natural persons and in particular their right to the protection of personal data
and to ensure the free movement of personal data within the Union, the power to adopt acts in
accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union should
be delegated to the Commission. In particular, delegated acts should be adopted in respect of

'0' It is of particular

(...); criteria and requirements for certiﬁcation mechanisms; (. . .); (. . .)
importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory
work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing-up delegated
acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents

to the European Parliament and Council.

 

101

Cion against deletion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 79
ANNEX DGD2C EN

130) In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation,

implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission for: (. . .); standard contractual

 

clauses between controllers and processors and between processors. codes of conduct; (. . .)
technical standards and mechanisms for certiﬁcation; the adequate level of protection afforded
by a third country or a territory or a processing sector within that third country or an

international organisation; adopt standard data protection clauses: formats and procedures for

 

the exchange of information between controllers. processors and supervisory authorities for

 

binding corporate rules; (. . .) mutual assistance; (. . .); the arrangements for the exchange of

 

information by electronic means between supervisory authorities. and between supervisory
m

 

authorities and the European Data Protection Board . Those powers should be exercised in

 

accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for
control by the Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers '03. In
this context, the Commission should consider speciﬁc measures for micro, small and

medium-sized enterprises.

 

102
103

Cion against deletion.

Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16
February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for
control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers, OJ L 55,
28.2.2011, p.13.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 80
ANNEX DGD2C EN

131)

132)

133)

The examination procedure should be used for the adoption of implementing acts on standard

 

contractual clauses between controllers and processors and between processors: codes of

conduct' (. . .) technical standards and mechanisms for certiﬁcation; the adequate level of

 

protection afforded by a third country or a territory or a processing sector within that third
country or an international organisation: adopt standard data protection clauses: formats and
procedures for the exchange of information by electronic means between controllers.
processors and supervisory authorities for binding corporate rules: mutual assistance; (. . .) th_e
arrangements for the exchange of information by electronic means between supervisory
authorities. and between supervisory authorities and the European Data Protection

Board 104given that those acts are of general scope.

The Commission should adopt immediately applicable implementing acts where, in duly
justiﬁed cases relating to a third country or a territory or a processing sector within that third
country or an international organisation which does not ensure an adequate level of protection

. . - 105
(. . .), imperative grounds of urgency so require.

Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely to ensure an equivalent level of protection of
individuals and the free ﬂow of data throughout the Union, cannot be sufﬁciently achieved by
the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the action, be better
achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of
subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the
principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what

is necessary in order to achieve that objective.

 

104
105

Cion against deletion.

Presidency suggestion to bring recital 132 in line with Article 41.
AT, FR, Cion: scrutiny reservation.

HU considered the phrase "and relating ...so require'l superﬂuous.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 81
ANNEX DGD2C EN

134) Directive 95/46/EC should be repealed by this Regulation. However, Commission decisions
adopted and authorisations by supervisory authorities based on Directive 95/46/EC should

remain in force.
106

135) This Regulation should apply to all matters concerning the protection of fundamental rights
and freedom vis-a-vis the processing of personal data, which are not subject to speciﬁc
obligations with the same objective set out in Directive 2002/5 8/EC, including the obligations
on the controller and the rights of individuals. In order to clarify the relationship between this
Regulation and Directive 2002/5 8/EC, the latter Directive should be amended accordingly.
Once this Regulation is adopted. Directive 2002/5 8/EC should be reviewed in particular in

order to ensure consistency with this Regulation (. . .).

 

136) (...)
137) (...)
138) (...)107.
139) (...)108

 

1"" FR, supported by ES, IE, NL and SI, suggested to insert a recital 134a ( DS 1367/15) that
prior formalities (such as prior consultation of the SA or consent by the data subject) in line
with Directive 95/46 should remain valid.

Recitals 136, 137 and 138 were deleted as this proposal is not Schengen relevant. COM
scrutiny reservation on these deletions.

Former recital 139 was moved up to recital 3a so as to emphasise the importance of the
fundamental rights dimension of data protection in connection with other fundamental
rights.

107

108

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 82
ANNEX DGD2C EN

HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I
Subject matter and objectives] 09
This Regulation lays down rules relating to the protection of individuals with regard to the

processing of personal data and rules relating to the free movement of personal data.

This Regulation protects (. . .) fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons and in

particular their right to the protection of personal data.

Member States110 may maintain or introduce more speciﬁc provisions to adapt the application
of the rules of this Regulation with regard to the processing of personal data for compliance
with a legal obligation or for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in

the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller or for other speciﬁc processing

111

situations as provided for in Article 6(1)(c) and (e) by determining more precisely speciﬁc

requirements for the processing and other measures to ensure lawful and fair processing

including for other speciﬁc processing situations as provided for in Chapter IX112 .

 

109

110

111
112

DE suggested to insert new recital (48a) (8089/15).

FR suggested to insert a reference that data subjects have a right to obtain their data. FR
suggested to insert "Data subjects have the right to decide upon the communication and use of
their personal data within the conditions and limits set forth in the present regulation".

BE suggested to insert "and institutions of the European Union". DE and IE considered this
suggestion worth considering. In response to queries of BE, CZ, DE, HU, NL, ES about non
applicability to EU institutions Cion referred to recital (14a) and the remarks made at the JHA
Council in June 2013 that the Regulation applicable to the EU Institutions would be
applicable at the same time as the GDPR and the Police Directive

HU asked to insert a reference to Article 9(2).

AT (15768/15), HU, SI reservation. These delegations were in favour of a minimum
harmonisation clause for the public sector. HU, supported by SK requested to clarify the
limits of paragraph (2a).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 83
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The free movement of personal data within the Union shall neither be restricted nor prohibited
for reasons connected with the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of

personal datam.

Article 2

Material scope

This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by automated
means, and to the processing other than by automated means of personal data which form part

of a ﬁling system or are intended to form part of a ﬁling systemm.

This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data:

(a) in the course of an activity which falls outside the scope of Union law (. . .);

(b) by the Union institutions, bodies, ofﬁces and agencies”;

 

113
114

115

SI scrutiny reservation.

HU, supported by EE and IT, and disadvised by IE and Cion referring to the long
discussions on data processed by non automated means, objected to the fact that data
processing operations not covered by this phrase would be excluded from the scope of the
Regulation and thought this was not compatible with the stated aim of a set of
comprehensive EU data protection rules. HU therefore proposed to replace the second part
by the following wording 'irrespective of the means by which personal data are processed'.
Cion further argued that the text of draft regulation not implied a restriction compared to the
directive currently in force which refers to ﬁling systems.

The Presidency suggests not to apply the regulation to Union institutions, bodies, ofﬁces and
agencies in line with the current acquis where the rules for processing of personal data by
Union institutions, bodies, ofﬁces and agencies are laid down in Regulation (EC) No
45/2001.The new EU data protection framework based on Article 16 TFEU will cover both
Member States and EU institutions and bodies. The Commission intends to present the
necessary proposals which will align Regulation 45/2001 with the principles and rules of the
General Data Protection Regulation as agreed by the co-legislators. The Commission intends
to present such proposals in a timely manner in order to ensure that the amended Regulation
45/2001 can enter into application at the same time as the General Data Protection
Regulation. BE, ES and PL did not support the insertion of the EU bodies.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 84
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(c) by the Member States when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of

Chapter 2 of Title V of the Treaty on European Union;

(d) by a natural person (. . .)116 in the course of (. . .)117 a personal or household activity;

(e) by competent (. . .) authorities for the purposes of prevention, investigation, detection
or prosecution of criminal offences= the execution of criminal penalties gm the

safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security m.

3 (. . .)
Article 3
Territorial scope
1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an

establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union.
2. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subjects residing in the
Union by a controller not established in the Union, where the processing activities are

related to:

(a) the offering of goods or services, irrespective of whether a payment by the

 

data subject is required, to such data subjects in the Union; or

(b) the monitoring of their behaviour as far as their behaviour takes place within

the European Unionm.

 

3. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by a controller not established in
the Union, but in a place where the national law of a Member State applies by virtue of public

international law.

 

116

SK suggested to insert "exclusively".
117

AT suggested to insert "solely" or "exclusively" both in Article 2 and in recital (15) with a
view to avoid lowering standards compared to the directive currently in force.

EL expressed concerns on the change from 'and’ to 'or' because it meant that it broadened
the scope too much by decoupling the purpose of 'prevention of threats to public security'
from the purposes of 'prevention of criminal offences': it preferred to revert to 'and’. LT
asked if this wording of Article 1 of the Directive covered 'administrative offences'. Cion
replied that it did on condition that it was linked to a potential criminal offence.

Cion: reservation. The exact wording of Article 2(2)(e) and the corresponding recital (16)
will need to be aligned to that of the data protection Directive still under discussion. RO
preferred a reference to 'public order'.

UK reservation.

118

119

120

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 85
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 4
Deﬁnitions

For the purposes of this Regulation:

(l) 121'personal data' means any information relating to an identiﬁed or identiﬁable
natural person ('data subiect'): an identiﬁable person is one who can be identiﬁed,
directly or indirectly (. . .), in particular by reference to an identiﬁer122 such as a
w, an identiﬁcation number, location data, online identiﬁer or to one or more
factors speciﬁc to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or

social identity of that person.

(2a) (...)

(3) 'processing' means any operation or set of operations which is performed upon
personal data or sets of personal data, whether or not by automated meansm, such as
collection, recording, organization, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration,
retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise
making available, alignment or combination (. . .) restriction, erasure g

- 124
destruction ;

(3 a) 'restriction of processing' means the marking of stored personal data with the aim of

limiting their processing in the futurem;

 

121
122

123
124

125

BE suggested to change the deﬁnition on the basis of recital (23).

UK is concerned that, together with recital 24, this will lead to risk-averse approach that this
is always personal data.

HU suggested to delete "whether or not by automated means".

Suggestion of DE, FR and SK which regretted that not all elements included in the list of
data processing operations of the directive currently in force are listed in the deﬁnition of
processing. These delegations argued these elements were especially useful in the public
sector. COM indicated that the right to have the processing restricted in certain cases was
provided for in Article 17a (restriction of data processing), even though the terminology
'blocking' was not used there. The term "blocking" was not used because it has a special
connotation on the Internet related to censorship. DE and FR thought the deﬁnition of
Article 4(3) (erasure) should be linked to Article 17.

FR, RO scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 86
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(3b)

(4)

(5)

(6)

'pseudonymisation' means the processing of personal data in such a way that the data
can no longer be attributed to a speciﬁc data subiect without the use of additional
information. as long as such additional information is kept separately and subiect to

technical and organisational measures to ensure non-attribution to an identiﬁed or

identiﬁable person (. . .)126.

'ﬁling system' means any structured set of personal data which are accessible
according to speciﬁc criteria, whether centralized, decentralized or dispersed on a

functional or geographical basism;

'controller' means the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other
body which alone or jointly with others determines the purposes (. . .) and means of
the processing of personal data; where the purposes (. . .) and means of processing are
determined by Union law or Member State law, the controller or the speciﬁc criteria

for his nomination may be designated by Union law or by Member State law; ’28

'processor' means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other

body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller;

 

126

127

128

DE, supported by UK, proposed reinserting the following reference 'or can be attributed to

such person only with the investment of a disproportionate amount of time, expense and

manp ower' .

DE, SI, and UK scrutiny reservation. DE and SI thought this was completely outdated
concept. COM explained that the deﬁnition had been taken over from Directive 95/46/EC
and is related to the technical neutrality of the Regulation, as expressed in Article 2(1).
CZ: delete "and means".

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 87
DGD2C EN

129

(7) 'recipient' means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other body

(. . .) to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not; '30

 

however. authorities which may receive data in the framework of a particular inquiry

shall not be regarded as recipients131 132;

(8) 'the data subject's consent' means any freely-given, speciﬁc ad informed (. . .)133

indication of his or her wishes by which the data subject, either by a statement or by
a clear afﬁrmative action, signiﬁes agreement to personal data relating to them being

processed;

 

129

130

131

132

133

DE, FR, HU, IT, and NL, opposed by Cion, requested the inclusion of a deﬁnition of third
party.

HU suggested: 'third party' means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any
other body other than the data subject, the data controller or the data processor."

SK suggested also a deﬁnition of "third party": 'third party' means any entity other than the
data subject, the controller providing personal data or the controller’s representative or his
processor. Alternatively, SK could accept the HU version.

Suggestion of DE, FR, NL, SI and SE which regretted the deletion from the 1995 Data
Protection Directive of the reference to third party disclosure and pleaded in favour of its
reinstatement. COM argued that this reference was superﬂuous and that its deletion did not
make a substantial difference. CZ suggested to delete "whether a third party or not".

AT, ES, HU, HR, NL suggested to delete the phrase "however recipients'' and DE, UK
scrutiny reservation on latter part of previous text of the deﬁnition. IE insisted on keeping
this phrase.

Suggestion by AT, ES, IT (supported by FR and Cion to go back to the wording of the
directive currently in force), NL and UK thought it could be deleted.

HU, opposed by PL suggested: " recipient means a natural or legal person, public authority,
agency or any other body to which personal data are disclosed".

AT suggested to insert a deﬁnition of further processing under reference to its Statement to
the JHA Council in March 2015.

COM, CY, GR, HU, IT, PL and R0 reservation on the deletion of 'explicit'.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 88
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(9) 'personal data breach' means a breach of securi m leading to the accidental or
unlawful destructionlss, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to,

personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed'36;

(10) 'genetic data' means all personal data relating to the genetic characteristics of an
individual that have been inherited or acquired. (...) which give unique information
about the physiology or the health of that individualm, resulting in particular138 from

an analysis of a biological sample from the individual in question 139'

 

 

134

135

136

137

138
139

In light of opposition CZ, IE, FR, IT, NL and Cion on deletion "of security", Presidency re-
inserts this phrase.

HU suggestion: "personal security breach means a breach of the provisions of this
Regulation leading to any unlawful operation or set of operations performed upon personal
data such as the accidental ..."

HU suggested ".. breach of the provisions of this regulation leading to any unlawful
operation performed on personal data such as. . . .". Cion did not support this suggestion.
COM , supported by LU, explained that it sought to have a similar rule as in the E-Privacy
Directive, which should be extended to all types of data processing.

DE scrutiny reservation questioned the very broad scope of the duty of notifying data
breaches, which so far under German law was limited to sensitive cases. NL, LV and PT
concurred with DE and thought this could lead to over-notiﬁcation. In the meantime the
scope of Articles 31 and 32 has been limited.

AT, HU found the focus of the deﬁnition on security breaches too narrow.

AT, FI: scrutiny reservation.

DK, ES, IT, MT, NL, SE rejected the limitation to "during pre-natal development'l
considering that genetic data can change after birth for example as a result of a cancer
treatment. DE found this phrase important.

In this context, BE referred to Recommendation 97/15 of the Council of Europe.

CZ reservation considering that genetic changes can also take place after birth, for example
after a transplantation.

Added at the request of FR, supported by AT, EE, ES, IT and SI.

AT, CY, DE, FR, IT and SE scrutiny reservation. Several delegations (CH, CY, DE and SE)
expressed their surprise regarding the breadth of this deﬁnition, which would also cover data
about a person's physical appearance.

DE thought the deﬁnition should differentiate between various types of genetic data. The
deﬁnition is now explained in the recital 25a.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 89
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(11) 'biometric data' means any personal data resulting from speciﬁc technical processing

 

relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of an individual
which allows or conﬁrms them unique identiﬁcation of that individual, such as

facial images, or dactyloscopic data'“;

(12) 'data concerning health' means m related to the physical or mental health of an

individual, which reveal information about his or her health status'42;

(12a) 'proﬁling' means M form of automated processing of personal data consisting of
using those data to evaluate personal aspects relating to a natural person. in particular
to analyse and predict aspects concerning performance at work. economic situation.
health. personal preferences. or interests. reliability or behaviour. location or

143
movements ;

(12b) (...)144

 

140
141

142

143

144

ES preferred 'allows' SI: scrutiny reservation on last part.

SE and AT scrutiny reservation. SI did not understand why genetic data were not included in
the deﬁnition of biometric data. FR queried the meaning of 'behavioural characteristics of an
individual which allow their unique identiﬁcation'. ES explained that research is done to
recognising persons by the way the y move or speak. CH is of the opinion that the term
'biometric data' is too broadly deﬁned. HU suggested to specify when "facial images'' are
biometric data in a recital.

SI reservation and AT, DE scrutiny reservation. COM scrutiny reservation.

BE, CZ, DE, and SI considered deﬁnition too broad. BE queried what "reveal" means. BE
also suggested "intending to reveal'' in deﬁnition (12) and recital (26). In reaction, Cion
pointed out that the directive currently in force already uses "reveal". BE: reservation. CZ,
SI suggested to insert "speciﬁc" before information.

BE, IT, R0 and SE scrutiny reservation. BE, FR, SI and R0 would prefer reverting to the
Council of Europe deﬁnition.

IT: scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 90
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(13)

. . 145
‘main establishment’ means

as regards a controller with establishments in more than one Member State, the place
of its central administration in the Union, unless the decisions on the purposes (. . .)
and means of the processing of personal data are taken in another establishment of
the controller in the Union and the latter establishment has the power to have such
decisions implemented , in this case the establishment having taken such decisions

shall be considered as the main establishment'46.

as regards g processor with establishments in more than one Member State. the place
of its central administration in the Union and, if the processor has no central
administration in the Union, the establishment of the processor in the Union where
the main processing activities in the context of the activities of an establishment of
the processor take place to the extent that the processor is subiect to speciﬁc

obligations under this Regulation;

 

145

146

AT remarked that, in view technological developments, it was very difﬁcult to pinpoint the
place of processing and , supported by ES, HU, PL, expressed a preference for a formal
criterion, which referred to the incorporation of the controller. AT pointed out that such
criterion would avoid the situation that, depending on the processing activity concerned,
there would be a different main establishment and consequently a different lead DPA.

BE reservation.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 91
DGD2C EN

(14) 'representative' means any natural or legal person established in the Union who, (. . .)
designated by the controller in writing pursuant to Article 25. represents the

controller with regard to the obligations of the controller under this Regulation (. . .);

(15) 'enterprise' means any natural or legal person engaged in an_economic activity,
irrespective of its legal form, 1 . .. ) including (. . .) partnerships or associations

regularly engaged in an economic activity;

(16) 'group of undertakings' means a controlling undertaking and its controlled

undertakings 147;

(17) 'binding corporate rules' means personal data protection policies which are adhered
to by a controller or processor established on the territory of a Member State of the
Union for transfers or a set of transfers of personal data to a controller or processor
in one or more third countries within a group of undertakings148 or group of

enterprises engaged in a ioint economic activity;

(18) (...)149

(19) 'supervisory authority' means an independent public authority which is established by
a Member State pursuant to Article 46;

(19a) 'concerned supervisory authority' means

- a supervisory authority which is concerned by the processing because:

a) the controller or processor is established on the territory of the Member State of

that supervisory authority:

 

147
148

149

DE scrutiny reservation. UK scrutiny reservation on all deﬁnitions in paragraphs 10 to 16.
DE queried whether BCRs could also cover intra-EU data transfers. COM indicated that
there was no need for BCRs in the case of intra-EU transfers, but that controllers were free
to apply BCRs also in those cases.

HU wanted to include as well non proﬁt organisations.

COM scrutiny reservation on the deletion of the deﬁnition of a child.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 92
ANNEX DGD2C EN

b) data subiects residing in this Member State are substantially150 affected or
likely to be substantially affected by the processing' or

c) the underlying complaint has been lodged to that supervisory authority.

(19b) 'transnational processing of personal data' means either:

(a) processing which takes place in the context of the activities of
establishments in more than one Member State of a controller or a processor in the
Union and the controller or processor is established in more than one Member

State' or

 

(b) processing which takes place in the context of the activities of a single
establishment of a controller or processor in the Union but which substantially
affects or is likely to substantially affect151 data subiects in more than one

Member State.

(19c) 'relevant and reasoned obiection' means:
an obiection as to whether there is an infringement of this Regulation or not. or. as
the case may be. whether the envisaged action in relation to the controller or
processor is in conformity with the Regulation. The obiection shall clearly
demonstrate152 the signiﬁcance of the risks posed by the draft decision as regards the

fundamental rights and freedoms of data subiects153 and where applicable. the free

ﬂow of personal data.

 

15" IE and UK would prefer the term 'materially'.

’51 Several Member States thought that this should be clariﬁed in recital: CZ, FI, HU, SE.
152 BE thought that this was a threshold too high.
153 IE thought that also risks to the controller should be covered.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 93
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(20) 'Information Society service' means any service as deﬁned by Article 1 (2) of
Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998
laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the ﬁeld of technical

- - - - 154 155 156
standards and regulations and of rules on Information Soc1ety serv1ces .

(21) 'intemational organisation' means an organisation and its subordinate bodies
governed by public international law or any other body which is set up by. or on the

. - 157
bas1s of. an agreement between two or more countries :

158

 

154
155

156

157

158

OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37—48.

UK suggests adding a deﬁnition of 'competent authority' corresponding to that of the future
Data Protection Directive.

BE, DE, FR and Ro suggest adding a deﬁnition of ‘transfer’ ('communication or availability
of the data to one or several recipients'). RO suggests adding 'transfers of personal data to
third countries or international organizations is a transmission of personal data object of
processing or designated to be processed after transfer which ensure an adequate level of
protection, whereas the adequacy of the level of protection afforded by a third country or
international organization must be assessed in the light of all the circumstances surrounding
the transfer operation or set of transfer operations'.

NL queried whether MOUs would also be covered by this deﬁnition; FI queried whether
Interpol would be covered. CZ, LV, SI, SE and UK pleaded in favour of its deletion.

SK proposed new deﬁnition: (22) 'public interest' means an important interest of the Union
or Member States pursued in the exercise of public authority which overrides the legitimate
interest of the natural person or several natural persons, and without pursuing of which
extensive or irreparable damages could arise.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 94
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES

Article 5

Principles relating to personal data processing

Personal data must be:
(a) processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subjectls”;

(b) collected for speciﬁed, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a

way incompatible with those purposes; further processing of personal data for archiving

 

purposes in the public interest or scientiﬁc. statistical 16" or historical purposes shall in

accordance with Article 83 not be considered incompatible with the initial purposesﬂ;

 

 

(c) adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are

processed (. . .)162;

 

159

160

161

162

DE proposed adding "and non-discriminatory" and "taking into account the beneﬁt of data
processing within a free, open and social society". This was viewed critically by several
delegations (CZ, ES, IE, IT, PL).

FR thought Chapter III should contain speciﬁc rules for protecting personal data processed for
statistical purposes; DE and PL thought statistical purposes should also be qualiﬁed by the
public interest ﬁlter. DE, supported by SI, suggested adding: "if the data have initially been
collected for these purposes".

Referring to Article 6(2), DE and Ro queried whether this phrase implied that a change of the
purpose of processing was always lawful in case of scientiﬁc processing, also in the absence
of consent by the data subject. BE queried whether the concept of compatible purposes was
still a useful one. HU and ES scrutiny reservations on reference to Article 83. FR thought that
health data could be processed only in the public interest or with the consent of the data
subject.

COM reservation on the deletion of the data minimisation principle. AT, CY, DE, EE, FR,
HU, IT, PL, FI and SI preferred to return to the initial COM wording, stating 'limited to the
minimum necessary'. DE, supported by PL, also suggested adding: "they shall only be
processed if, and as long as, the purposes could not be fulﬁlled by processing information that
does not involve personal data". UK was opposed to any further amendments to this point.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 95
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(d) accurate and, where necessagy, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be taken to
ensure that personal data that are inaccurate, having regard to the purposes for which

they are processed, are erased or rectiﬁed without delay;

(e) kept in a form which permits identiﬁcation of data subjects for no longer than is
necessary for the purposes for which the personal data are processed (. . .); personal data
may be stored for longer periods insofar as the data will be processed for archiving
purposes in the public interest or scientiﬁc. statistical. or historical purposes in
accordance with Article 83 subiect to implementation of the appropriate technical and

organisational measures required by the Regulation in order to safeguard the rights and

freedoms of data subjectm;

(ee) processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data.

(0 (---)

The controller shall be responsible for compliance with paragraph 1’“.

Article 6

Lawfulness of processing1 65
Processing of personal data shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the

following applies:

(a) the data subject has given unambiguous166consent to the processing of their personal

- 167
data for one or more spec1ﬁc purposes ;

 

163

164

165

166

167

FR scrutiny reservation. SK indicated that the case of private archiving was still not
addressed. CZ and SE thought the last part of this sentence should be deleted.

It was previously proposed to add 'also in case of personal data being processed on its behalf
by a processor', but further to suggestion from FR, this rule on liability may be dealt with in
the context of Chapter VIII.

DE, AT, PT, SI: scrutiny reservation.

AT submitted suggestions (8408/15)

FR, PL and COM reservation in relation to the deletion of 'explicit' in the deﬁnition of
‘consent’; UK thought that the addition of 'unambiguous' was unjustiﬁed.

RO scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 96
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is
party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a

contract;

(c) processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is

subject;

(d) processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of

another person;

(e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or

in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller;

(f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests168 pursued by th_e
controller or by a third party ’69 except where such interests are overridden by the
interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require

protection of personal data, in particular where the data subject is a child. (. . .)170 171.

172Processing of personal data which is necessary for archiving purposes in the public interest.

 

or for historical, statistical or scientiﬁc purposes shall be lawful subject also to the conditions

and safeguards referred to in Article 83.

 

168
169

170

171

172

FR scrutiny reservation.
Reinstated at the request of BG, CZ, DE, ES, HU, IT, NL, SE, SK and UK. COM, IE, FR and
PL reservation on this reinstatement.
Deleted at the request of BE, CZ, DK, IE, MT, SE, SI, SK, PT and UK. COM, AT, CY, DE,
FI, FR, GR and IT wanted to maintain the last sentence. COM reservation against deletion of
the last sentence, stressing that processing by public authorities in the exercise of their public
duties should rely on the grounds in point c) and e).
FR regretted there was no longer a reference to purposes set out in Article 9(2) and thought
that the link between Article 6 and 9 needed to be clariﬁed.

PL suggested to insert "Without prejudice to processing ...."

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 97
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The basis @ the processing referred to in points (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 must be

established in accordance with:
(a) Union law, or
(b) national law of the Member State to which the controller is subjectm.

The purpose of the processing shall be determined in this legal basis or as regards the
processing referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1. be necessary for the performance of a task
carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller.
This legal basis may contain speciﬁc provisions to adapt the application of rules of this
Regulation. inter alia the general conditions governing the lawfulness of data processing by
the controller. the type of data which are subiect to the processing. the data subiects
concerned: the entities to. and the purposes for which the data may be disclosed: the purpose
limitation: storage periods and processing operations and processing procedures. including
measures to ensure lawful and fair processing including for other speciﬁc processing

situations as provided for in Chapter IX.

 

173

It was pointed out that the text of Article 6 may have an adverse effect on the collection of
personal data under administrative, criminal and civil law collections by third country public
authorities, in that Article 6 provides that processing for compliance with a legal obligation to
which the controller is subject or for the performance of a task carried out in the public
interest may only take place to the extent established in accordance with Union or Member
State law. Compliance with the administrative, regulatory, civil and criminal law
requirements of a third country incumbent on controllers that engage in commercial or other
regulated activities with respect to third countries, or voluntary reporting of violations of law
to, or cooperation with, third country administrative, regulatory, civil and criminal law
enforcement authorities appear not be allowed under the current draft of Article 6. The
Presidency thinks this point will have to be examined in the future, notably in the context of
Chapter I.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 98
ANNEX DGD2C EN

g In order to ascertain whether a purpose of further processing ( . . .)174 is compatible with the
one for which the data are initially collected. the controller shall take into account. unless the

- - 175 - - 176
data subject has given consent . inter alia :

(g) any link between the purposes for which the data have been collected and the

purposes of the intended further processing;

 

 

 

 

(p) the context in which the data have been collected:

(p) the nature of the personal data. in particular whether special categories of personal
data are processed. pursuant to Article 9;

(d) the possible consequences of the intended further processing for data subiects:m

(p) the existence of appropriate safeguardsm.

 

 

174
175

AT, HU wanted to re-insert "by the same controller".

DK, IT and PT scrutiny reservation; IT deemed this irrelevant to compatibility test.

17" DK, FI, NL, Ro, SI and SE stressed the list should not be exhaustive.

’77 AT suggested deletion.

’78 AT suggested deletion.

DE, SK and PL reservation: safeguards as such do not make further processing compatible.
FR queried to which processing this criterion related: the initial or further processing. DE and
UK pleaded for the deletion of paragraph 3a.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 99
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Where the purpose of further processing is incompatible with the one for which the personal

data have been collected by the same controller.'the further processing must have a legal basis
179 180

 

at least in one of the grounds referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 1 . Further

processing by the same controller for incompatible purposes on grounds of legitimate interests

 

of that controller or a third party shall be lawful if these interests override the interests of the

data subjectﬂﬂ

 

(...)

Article 7

Conditions for consent

Where Article 6( 1)( a) applies the controller shall be able to demonstrate that

 

unambiguouslssconsent was given by the data subiect.

 

Where Article 9(2)( a) applies. the controller shall be able to demonstrate that explicit consent

 

was given by the data subiect.

 

If the data subject's consent is to be given in the context of a written declaration which also

concerns other matterp, the request for consent must be presented in a manner which is clearly

 

distinguishable (. . .) from th_e other matters. in an intelligible and easily accessible form. using

 

clear and plain language.

 

179

180

181

182

183

ES, AT and PL reservation; DE, HU scrutiny reservation. FR suggested adding 'if the process
concerns the data mentioned in Articles 8 and 9'.

HU, supported by CY, FR, AT and SK, thought that a duty for the data controller to inform
the data subject of a change of legal basis should be added here. The Presidency refers to the
changes proposed in ADD 1 to 17072/3/ 14 REV 3.

Cion reservation; AT, BE, BG, DK, ES, FI, HU, IT, LT, PL, SE reservation on paragraph 4
and in particular the last sentence; DE wanted to limit the second sentence to private
controllers.

AT, CZ, HU considered the references to the same controller in paragraph (4) inconsistent
with paragraph (3 a) and proposed to either delete these references or to specify that only the
same controller can do further processing

SI: scrutiny reservation.

COM reservation related to the deletion of 'explicit' in the deﬁnition of consent.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 100
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The data subject shall have the right to withdraw his or her consent at any time. The

withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness of processing based on consent before its

withdrawal. Prior to giving consent. the data subiect shall be informed thereof184.

 

(...)

Article 8

Conditions applicable to child 's consent in relation to information society services 1—85

Where Article 6 ( 1)( a) appliesm, in relation to the offering of information society services

 

directly to a child’”, the processing of personal data of a child (. . .)188 shall only be lawful if
and to the extent that such consent is given or authorised by the holder of parental

responsibility over the child or is given by the child in circumstances where it is treated as

 

valid by Union or Member State law.

 

The controller shall make reasonable efforts to verify in such cases that consent is given g

authorised by the holder of parental responsibility over the child. taking into consideration

 

available technology.

Paragraph 1 shall not affect the general contract law of Member States such as the rules on the

validity, formation or effect of a contract in relation to a child.

 

184

185
186

187

188

IE reservation. The Presidency concurs with SE that the last sentence belongs rather in Article
14. To that end the Presidency has made some suggestions set out in ADD 1 to 17072/3/ 14
REV 3.

CZ, MT, ES, SI would have preferred to see this Article deleted.

HU suggested to delete the reference to information society services directly to a child or if
that is not possible to insert in particular after applies. HU also wanted to insert a reference to
Article 9(2).

Several delegations (DE, HU, ES, FR, SE, SK, PT) disagreed with the restriction of the scope
and thought the phrase 'in relation to the offering of information society services directly to a
child' should be deleted. HU suggested to delete "in relation to child" or to insert "after
applies, "in particular".

COM reservation on the deletion of a harmonised age threshold.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 101
ANNEX DGD2C EN

4 (...)
Article 9
Processing of special categories of personal data189
1. The processing of personal data, revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religiou_s

or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, and the processing of genetic data or data
concerning health or sex life (. . .) shall be prohibited.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the following applies (_)

(a) the data subject has given explicit consent to the processing of those personal data (. . .),
except where Union law or Member State law provide that the prohibition referred to in

paragraph 1 may not be lifted by the data subject; or

 

'89 COM, SE and AT scrutiny reservation. SK thought the inclusion of biometric data should be

considered.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 102
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) processing is necessary for the purposes of carrying out the obligations and exercising

speciﬁc rights of the controller or of the data subject in the ﬁeld of employment and social

 

security and social protection law in so far as it is authorised by Union law or Member State

law or a collective agreement pursuant to Member State law providing for adequate

 

safeguards; or

(c) processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another

person where the data subject is physically or legally incapable of giving consent; or

(d) processing is carried out in the course of its legitimate activities with appropriate
safeguards by a foundation, association or any other non-proﬁt-seeking body with a political,
philosophical, religious or trade-union aim and on condition that the processing relates solely
to the members or to former members of the body or to persons who have regular contact with
it in connection with its purposes and that the data are not disclosed outside that body without

the consent of the data subjects; or

(e) the processing relates to personal data which are manifestly made public by the data

subject (...); or

(f) processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims g

whenever courts are acting in their judicial capacity; or

 

(g) processing is necessary for (. . .)190 reasons of public interest, on the basis of Union law
or Member State law which shall provide for suitable and speciﬁc measures to safeguard the

data subject's legitimate interests; or

 

19" AT, PL and COM reservation on deletion of 'important'; DK suggested adding 'in the public

interest vested in the controller'.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 103
ANNEX DGD2C EN

. 191 . . . - - 192
(h) process1ng is necessary for the purposes of preventive or occupational medic1ne—,

for the assessment of the working capacity of the employee&, medical diagnosis. the
provision of health or social care or treatment or the management of health or social care
systems and services on the basis of Union law or Member State law m or pursuant to

contract with a health professionalﬂ and subject to the conditions and safeguards referred to

in paragraph 4'96; or

th_a) (---);

(hb) processing is necessary for reasons of public interest in the area of public health. such as
protecting against serious cross-border threats to health or ensuring high standards of quality
and safety of health care and of medicinal products or medical devices. on the basis of Union
law or Member State law which provides for suitable and speciﬁc measures to safeguard the

rights and freedoms of the data subject: or

(i) processing is necessary for archiving purposes in the public interest or historical,
statistical or scientiﬁc (. . .) purposes M subject to the conditions and safeguards laid down in

Union or Member State law. including those referred to in Article 83.

 

191
192

193
194
195
196

HU suggested reinstating "of health data" here and in point (hb).

AT would like to see this deleted; BE pointed out this type of medicine practice is not
(entirely) regulated by law under Belgian law and therefore the requirement of paragraph 4 is
not met.

PL and AT would like to see this deleted.

COM, IE, PL scrutiny reservation.

FR and PL reservation.

AT, DE and ES scrutiny reservation. DE and ES queried what happened in cases where
obtaining consent was not possible (e. g. in case of contagious diseases; persons who were
physically or mentally not able to provide consent); NL thought this should be further
clariﬁed in recital 42. BE queried what happened in the case of processing of health data by
insurance companies. COM explained that this was covered by Article 9(2) (a), but SI was not
convinced thereof.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 104
ANNEX DGD2C EN

IF"

0) (---)197

198

(. . -)199

Personal data referred to in paragraph I may on the basis of Union or Member State law be
processed for the purposes referred to in point (h) (...) 0 paragraph 2 m those data are
processed by or under the responsibility of a (...) professional subject to the obligation of
professional secrecy under Union or Member State law or rules established by national
competent bodies or by another person also subject to an obligation of secrecy under Union

or Member State law or rules established by national competent bodies.

(...)20".

Member States may maintain or introduce more speciﬁc provisions with regard to genetic
data or health data. This includes the possibility for Member States to (...) introduce further

conditions for the processing of these data“.

 

197

198

199
200

201

Deleted at the request of AT, COM, EE, ES, FR, HU, IT, MT, PL, PT, R0 and SK. DE—and FI
wanted to reintroduce the paragraph.

SK proposed a new point (k): "processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation
to which the controller is subject".

COM reservation on the deletion of paragraph 3 on delegated acts.

Deleted further to the request from COM, CZ, DK, GR, IE, MT, SE, FI and UK scrutiny
reservation. FR wanted to keep paragraph 4a in Article 9 or at least keep the text in a recital.
COM scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 105
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 9a

Processing of data relating to criminal convictions and offencesM

Processing of data relating to criminal convictions and offences or related security measures

based on Article 6(1) may only be carried out either under the control of oﬁ‘icial authority

 

(...) or when the processing is (. . .) authorised by Union law or Member State law providing

for adequate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of data subjects. A complete register of

 

criminal convictions may be kept only under the control of ofﬁcial authority203.

 

 

202 DE and HU would prefer to see these data treated as sensitive data in the sense of Article 9(1).

EE and UK are strongly opposed thereto.

203 -
SI, SK reservation on last sentence.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 106
ANNEX DGD2C EN

LN

Article I 0
Processing not requiring identiﬁcation

If the purposes for which a controller processes personal data do not or do no longer require
the identiﬁcation of a data subject by the controller, the controller shall not be obliged to
maintain or acquire (. . .) additional information nor to engage in additional processing in order

to identify the data subject for the sole purpose of complying with (. . .) this Regulation204.(. . .)

Where. in such cases the controller is not in a position to identify the data subject. articles 15.
16. 17. 17a. 17b and 18 do not apply except where the data subject. for the purpose of
exercising his or her rights under these articles. provides additional information enabling his

or her identiﬁcationﬁ.

 

204
205

AT, DE, HU, PL scrutiny reservation and UK and FR and COM reservation.

RO, SE and SI scrutiny reservation; COM and FR reservation; FR wanted to add in the end
of the paragraph "In any case, the data subject should only have to provide the minimum
additional information necessary in order to be able to exercise his or her rights which can
never be denied by the controller.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 107
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(..
(..

-)
-)

CHAPTER 111
RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT206

SECTION 1

TRANSPARENCY AND MODALITIES

Article I I

Transparent information and communication

 

206

General scrutiny reservation by UK on the articles in this Chapter.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np
DGD2C

108
EN

Article 12
Transparent information, communication and modalities for exercising the rights of the

data subject

1. The controller shall take appropriate measuresM to provide any information referred

 

to in Articles 14 and 14a and any communication under Articles 15 to 19 and 32
relating to the processing of personal data to the data subject in an intelligible and

208. The information shall be

easily accessible form. using clear and plain language
provided in writing or by other 2"”means, where appropriate electronically2'o. Where
the data subject makes the request in electronic form. the information may as a rule
be provided in electronic form. unless otherwise requested by the data subject. When
requested by the data subject. the information may211 be given orally provided that

the identity of the data subject is proven.212 213 214 m

 

207

208
209
210

211
212
213

214
215

AT, supported by MT, PL, suggested to delete the text take appropriate measures, in
contrast DE wanted to keep this phrase.

AT suggested adding: "and adapted to the data subject".

SI suggested to insert "demonstrable".

SE did not see any added value in or where appropriate, electronically, in contrast to CZ
and PL, which wanted to keep this phrase.

AT meant that the information could be provided orally as long as the data subject agreed to
that. COM found that idea sympathetic.

AT made a suggestion for the second sentence of paragraph 1 (75 86/ 15 REV1)

IE was not convinced that data subjects under all circumstances could receive information in
paper form.

SK, suggested "must" instead of "may".

UK suggested that the paragraph could also refer to machine readable information.

IE opposed obliging the data controller to provide personal data in paper form in all cases as
this could be burdensome and costly.

DE suggested to add at the end "if this does not involve a disproportionate effort".

FI suggested to delete the last two sentences of the paragraph considering these too detailed
and, because they do not take into account that electronic information sometimes cannot be
provided for instance for security reasons or because the controller does not have that
information in electronic form. In reaction, Cion, supported by DE and F1, suggested "may
as a rule".

DE suggested to insert at the end "if this does not involve a disproportionate effort".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 109
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1a. mThe controller shall facilitate217 the exercise of data subject rights under Articles

15 to 19218. (. . .) In cases referred to in Article 10 (2) the controller shall not refuse to
act on the request of the data subject for exercising his/her rights under Articles 15 to

19. unless the controller demonstrates that 21” he/she is not in a position to identify

the data subject.

2. The controller shall provide (...) information on action taken on a request under
Articles 15 and 16 to 19 to the data subject without undue delay and at the latest
within one month220 of receipt of the request (. . .). This period may be extended for a
further tlo month§ when necessary. taking into account the complexity of the
request and the number of requests. Where the extended period applies. the data

subject shall be informed within one month of receipt of the request of the reasons

for the delay.

 

216

217
218

219
220

CZ, IE, FI, FR, SK, UK: reservation.

PL scrutiny reservation on relation between the last sentence of paragraph 1a and Article
10(2).

AT scrutiny reservation. AT pointed to the relation with Article 12(4a).

BE, supported by EE, FR, pointed to the importance of making the digital identiﬁcation, for
example through a log-in or an e-mail address, besides the identiﬁcation of a physical
person.

CZ suggested instead: "The controller shall not make any obstacles to. . . "

SI, CZ and UK thought this paragraph should be deleted because already covered by Article
10(2).

UK suggested to delete "demonstrates that he" to align with Article 10(2).

FR suggested a two months' period. UK said that the 1995 Directive uses 'without excessive
delay' and suggested to use it here too. FR and UK wanted to extend the deadline. CZ, SI,
UK pleaded in favour of deleting the one-month period. BG and PT thought it more simple
to revert to the requirement of 'without excessive delay' under the 1995 Data Protection
Directive. SI suggested to say 'in accordance with law' because the MS have general rules on
deadlines. SK wanted a ﬁxed deadline with ﬂexibility of one month. ES and Cion said that a
deadline was necessary, ES supporting a one month deadline.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 110
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. If the controller does not take action on the request of the data subject, the controller
shall inform the data subject without undue delay and at the latest within one month
of receipt of the request of the reasons for not taking action and on the possibility of

lodging a complaint to g supervisory authority (. . .).

221 - -
and any communication

under Articles 16 to 19 and 32 shall be provided free of chargem._Where requests

4. Information provided under Articles 14 and 14a (. . .)

 

- - 223 - 224 . .
from a data subject are manifestly unfounded or excess1ve , in particular because

of their repetitive character225, the controller (. . .) may refuse to act on the request. In

 

that case, the controller shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestly

unfounded or excessive character of the request.

4a. 226Without prejudice to Article 10. where the controller has reasonable doubts
227

 

concerning the identity of the individual making the request referred to in Articles
15 to 19. the controller may request the provision of additional information

necessary to conﬁrm the identity of the data subject.

 

221
222

223

224

225
226
227

UK wanted to see the reinsertion of a reference to Article 15.

SE thought that since information in Article14 was to be provided by the data subject it did
not ﬁt in the context to talk about free of charge.

DE, supported by BE, ES and PL suggested to say abusive instead of manifestly unfounded.
Also DE preferred "abusive". SI thought that abusive could be used in a recital. IE, AT, DK,
UK, PT, No, Ro, HR, EL, SI, CY, FI, CZ, LT, SE,SK, MT supported the term “manifestly
unfounded”.

PL, supported by SE, thought that the criterion of 'manifestly excessive' required further
clariﬁcation, e. g. through an additional recital.

CZ found the wording complex and suggested to grant the data subject the right to request
information every 6 months.

AT suggested to delete "in particular of their repetitive character".

AT suggested a recital on identiﬁcation of the data subject (75 86/ 15 REV1)

SI suggested to replace identity with authentiﬁcation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 111
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 13

Rights in relation to recipients228

(...)

SECTION 2
INFORMATION AND ACCESS TO DATA

Article 14

Information to be provided where the data are collected from the data subject229

1. Where personal data relating to a data subject are collected from the data subject, the
controller shall (. . .),at the time 230when personal data are obtained. provide the data

subject with the following information:

 

228

229

230

FR suggested a new Article 13a on standardised information policies, or, alternatively a
recital, with the following wording: 'In order to ensure that the information to be provided to
the data subjects according to this Regulation will be presented in an easily visible and
clearly legible way and will appear in a language easily understood by the data subjects
concerned, the European Data Protection Board shall issue guidelines to further specify the
requirements for speciﬁc categories of processing or speciﬁc data processing sectors,
including by issuing aligned tabular, using text and symbols or pictographs.' that is inspired
by a suggestion by the EP.

DE, ES, NL, SE, FI, PT and UK scrutiny reservation.

DE, supported by ES and NL, has asked the Commission to provide an assessment of the
extra costs for the industry under this provision. DE found the EP idea of providing
information in the form of symbols was an interesting idea which facilitates the provision of
information. SE found it peculiar that for example a court would be obliged to provide
separate information to the data subject about a case that the data subject had initiated; such
obligations are set out in the code on procedure.

UK, supported by CZ, suggested to have instead: "as soon as / where practicable,". In
reaction, Cion indicated that this would lower the level of data protection compared to the
Directive 95/46/EC.

DE suggested to insert "where appropriate". In response, Cion indicated that "where
appropriate" is not possible because the moment that the controller would ask data from the
data subject it must inform the data subject.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 112
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(a) the identity and the contact details of the controller and, if any, of the
controller's representative: the controller shall also include the contact details

of the data protection ofﬁcer, if any;

(b) the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended (. . .)

as well as the legal basis of the processingm.

232

1a. In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 1. the controller shall233 at

the time when personal data are obtained 234provide the data subject with such

235 - - .
that ls necessary to ensure fair and transparent process1ng

further information
(. . .) 236. having regard to the speciﬁc circumstances and context in which the

237 238
personal data are processed—:

 

 

231
232

233

234
235
236

237

238

Suggestion of AT, HU, PL, SK. Opposed by DK, SE.

UK found the list too long considering that more discretion is needed so that information
should be provided when it would have added value.

DE, and PL asked to insert "on request". DE, DK, NL and UK doubted whether the redraft
would allow for a sufﬁcient risk-based approach and warned against excessive
administrative burdens/compliance costs. NL, supported by CY and CZ, suggested therefore
to add 'where appropriate' after shall DK and UK in particular referred to the difﬁculty for
controllers in assessing what is required under para. la in order to ensure fair and
transparent processing. DE and PL pleaded for making the obligation to provide this
information contingent upon a request thereto as the controller might otherwise take a risk-
averse approach and provide all the information under Article 14(1a), also in cases where
not required. UK thought that many of the aspects set out in paragraph 1a of Article 14 (and
paragraph 2 of Article 14a) could be left to guidance under Article 39. DE, supported by IT,
suggested to insert 'at the time when the personal data was obtained'. In contrast, IT thought
that it was not necessary to provide the information at the same time.

DE suggestion supported by Cion and PL.

CZ suggested adding the word 'obviously'.

Deleted at the suggestion of FR. AT, opposed by Cion, wanted to delete the end of the
sentence from 'having regard ...'

COM reservation, supported by ES, on deletion of the words 'such as'. AT preferred the
COM proposal because in particular the new paragraph 1a was drafted in a too open and
vague manner, therefore the NL suggestion to add where appropriate went in the wrong
direction. IT was against reducing the safeguards and considered the text as the bare
minimum.

CZ, supported by Cion, suggested to insert again the reference to the data subject.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 113
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(a) (---);239

(b) where the processing is based on point (f) of Article 6( 1). the legitimate

interests pursued by the controller or by a third party:
(c) the recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data240;

(d) where applicable, that the controller intends to transfer personal data to a

recipient in g third country or international organisation;

(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and
rectiﬁcation or erasure of the personal data or restriction of processing of
personal data concerning the data subject and to object to the processing of

such personal data (. . .) as well as the right to data portability 241;

(ea) where the processing is based on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of
Article 9(2)242. the existence of the right to withdraw consent243 at any
time244. without affecting the lawfulness of processing based on consent

before its withdrawal:

 

(f) the right to lodge a complaint to g supervisory authority (. . .)245;

 

239

240

241

242
243
244
245

BE, supported by FR, HU, IT, MT, SK, PL, wanted either to reintroduce the text of Article
14(1)(c) on storage period or add as the EP has done the criteria used to determine the
period Cion also supported the reinsertion on text on a storage period.

AT and DE thought that this concept was too vague (does it e. g. encompass employees of
the data controller?)

BE suggestion, supported by COM. The reference to direct marketing was deleted in view of
comments by FR, IT and SE. IT said that the information in paragraphs (e) and (f) were set
out in Article 8 of the Charter and always had to be provided and therefore needed to be
included in paragraph 1.

DE suggested to delete "or point (a) of Article 9(2)".

DE suggested to insert "pursuant to Article 7(4).

DE suggested to insert a reference to Article 7(3).

IT said that the information in paragraphs (e) and (f) were set out in Article 8 of the Charter
and always had to be provided and therefore needed to be included in paragraph 1.AT
supported this concerning point (e) (75 86/2/15).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 114
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(g) whether the provision of personal data is a statutory or contractual
requirement. or a requirement necessary to enter into a contract. as well as
whether the data subject is obliged to provide the data and of the possible

. . 246
consequences of failure to prov1de such data ;

Q) 247the existence of automated decision making including proﬁling referred to

in Article 20(1) and (3) and information concerning (. . .) the logic

248
d

involve , as well as the significance and the envisaged consequences of

such processing for the data subject. 249

 

246
247

248

249

CZ, DE, ES reservation.

PL suggested: "where applicable, information about the existence of proﬁling referred to in
Article 4(12a) and/or about automated decision making referred to in Article 20(1) and (3)
and information concerning. . . .".
SE preferred to delete the phrase "the logic involved".

AT pointed out need to make terms consistent in this paragraph and Articles 14a(2) and
Article 15(1)(h).

SE scrutiny reservation. IT meant that there were problems with this paragraph if the current
text of Article 20 was maintained. DK suggested to delete this point considering it too

burdensome.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 115
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1b. Where the controller intends to further250 process the data (...) for a purpose other
than the one for which the data were collected the controller shall provide the data
subject prior to that further processing with information on that other purpose and

with any relevant further information as referred to in paragraph 1a.251 m

2. (...)25$
3 (...)
4 (...)

 

250

251

252

253

DK, IE, FR reservation.

DE: scrutiny reservation.

UK suggested to delete this paragraph.

AT meant that the paragraph was relevant and important. FR, IT, PL, RO, NO and COM
supported paragraph (1b).

BE, PL pointed out that Article 14(1b) and Article 14a(3 a) should use consistent wording.
DE made a suggestion (8089/15/).

Cion opposed the DE suggestion referring to Article 21 which allows Member States to
restrict of the obligations and rights in inter alia Article 14 and 14a. Moreover, Directive
95/46/EC does not provide for such restrictions and therefore the DE suggestions would
lower the level of data protection.

DE, supported by FR, pointed out that it understood the paragraph to concern both
compatible and incompatible purposes given that that the reference to Article 6(4) which
refers to incompatible purposes only was deleted.

HU and AT reservation on the deletion of this paragraph.

DE made a suggestion (8089/15)

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 116
ANNEX DGD2C EN

254
b

5. Paragraphs 1, 1a and 1 shall not apply where and insofar as the data subject

already has the informationzss,

ﬂ

6 (...)
7 (...)
8 (...)

Article 14 a

Information to be provided where the data have not been obtained from the data subjectm

1. Where personal data have not been obtained from the data subject. the controller

shall provide the data subject with the following information258 259:

(a) the identity and the contact details of the controller and, if any, of the

controller's representative: the controller shall also include the contact details

of the data protection ofﬁcer, if any;

 

254

255

256

257
258
259

Suggestion by CZ, DK, NL, SE and NO.

ES considered that the reference to paragraph 1b could be deleted.

SE, supported by CZ, thought that it was necessary to insert more exceptions to the
obligation to provide information SE mentioned such as illness or a ﬁre. COM cautioned
against limiting Article 14 too much. SE further considered that a similar provision to the
one in Article 14a(4)(c) should be added. SE noted that recital 50 did not make a difference
between the situations in Article 14 and 14a. Article 21 on restrictions would be difﬁcult to
use to create exceptions considered SE.

PL made a suggestion (8295/15).

DE, on the substance supported by MT, suggested to add a new point (f): "where the data
are processed by a micro enterprise which processes data only as an ancillary activity.
DE, ES, AT, PT scrutiny reservation.

DE suggested to add: "where appropriate".

RO wanted tot add that this information should be provided once per year.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np

ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended ﬂ

well as the legal basis of the processing260.

 

2. In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 1. the controller shall provide
the data subject with such further information that is necessary to ensure fair and
transparent processing in respect of the data subject. having regard to the speciﬁc

- 261 - - 262
Circumstances and context in which the personal data are processed (. . .) :

(a) the categories of personal data concerned;

 

(b) (- - -)263

(c) where the processing is based on point (f) of Article 6( 1). the legitimate

interests pursued by the controller or by a third party:

 

(d) the recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data;

(da) where applicable, that the controller intends to transfer personal data to a

recipient in a third country or international organisation;

(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and

rectiﬁcation or erasure of the personal data or restriction of processing of

 

personal dataﬂ concerning the data subject and to object to the processing of
such personal data as well as the right to data portability (. . .);

 

 

260

261
262
263

264

Suggestion of HU, AT, PL and SK. Opposed by DK, SE.

PL also suggested a new point: "the origin of the personal data, unless the data originate
from publicly accessible sources".

IT and FR doubts on the addition of the words 'and context'.

DE suggested to add: "at the time when personal data are processed for the ﬁrst time".
BE, IT, FR, HU, MT, SK, PL, supported by Cion, wanted, as in Article 14(1a), a text on
storage period or add as the EP has done the criteria used to determine the period
Suggestion of SE.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 118
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(ea) where the processing is based on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of
Article 9(2). the existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time.
without affecting the lawfulness of processing based on consent before its

withdrawal '

 

(f) the right to lodge a complaint to g supervisory authority (. . .);

(g) 265from which source the personal data originate. unless the data originate

- - 266 267
from publicly access1ble sources : —

ﬁt) the existence of automated decision making including proﬁling referred to in
Article 20(1) and (3 ) and268 information concerning the logic involved269, as
well as the signiﬁcance and the envisaged consequences of such processing

for the data subject.270
3. The controller shall provide the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2:

(a) within a reasonable period after obtaining the data. but at the latest within one

monthm. having regard to the speciﬁc circumstances in which the data are

processed, or

(b) if a disclosure to another recipient is envisaged, at the latest when the data are

ﬁrst disclosed.

 

265
266

267

268
269

270
271

Suggestion of DE. PL suggested to move this point to paragraph 1.

Cion and AT scrutiny reservation. BE, supported by ES and SE, suggested to delete
paragraph (g). AT (7586/2/15), IT suggested to delete the phrase: "unless. . .. sources".
Cion reservation (in line with position on the deletion of paragraph 4(d). PL suggested to
move point (g) to paragraph 1.

PL suggested instead "and/or".

SE considered the phrase "the logic ...processing" unnecessary because already covered by
Article 15(1)(h).

AT pointed out the need to make terms consistent between this paragraph and Articles
14a(2) and Article 15(1)(h).

DK suggested to delete this point considering it too burdensome.

CZ reservation on one month ﬁxed period.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 119
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3a Where the controller intends to further 272process the data (. . .) for a purpose other

273
d

than the one for which the data were obtaine . the controller shall provide the data

subject prior to that further processing with information on that other purpose and

with any relevant further information as referred to in paragraph 2mm

4. Paragraphs 1 to 3_a shall not apply where and insofar as:
(a) the data subject already has the information; or

(b) the provision of such information (. . .) proves impossible or would involve a
disproportionate effort 27" 277: in such cases the controller shall take

appropriate measures to protect the data subject's rights and freedoms and

- - - 278
legitimate interests—; or

 

272

273
274

275
276

277

278

DK, FR, IE: reservation

DE: scrutiny reservation.

DE, FI, PL queried what "purpose other than the one for which the data were obtained"
meant.

CZ scrutiny reservation on concept of obtaining data.

IT meant that paragraph 3a represented the bare minimum of protection. AT support of the
paragraph. UK meant that it should be used taking into account proportionality and
practicability.

FI considered the wording of the paragraph less clear now that the reference to Article 6(4)
has been deleted.

DE made a text suggestion (8089/15).

FR and AT asked what the words or is likely purposes of the processing were supposed to
mean. COM wanted to delete that part of the paragraph. CZ wanted to keep the text in order
to avoid fraud. COM noted that it was important to avoid fraud but considered that Article
21 gave the necessary ﬂexibility for that.

Suggestion of ES, FR, supported by Cion, to delete the phrase " or is likely to render
impossible or to seriously impair the achievement of the purposes of the processing". CZ,
DE opposed deletion of this phrase.

COM scrutiny reservation.

Several delegations (FI, PL, SI, SK, and LT) thought that in this Regulation (contrary to the
1995 Directive) the text should be speciﬁed so as to clarify both the concepts of 'appropriate
measures' and of 'legitimate interests'. According to the Commission, this should be done
through delegated acts under Article 15(7). DE warned that a dangerous situation might
ensue if these delegated acts were not enacted in due time.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 120
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(c) obtaining or disclosure is expressly laid down by Union or Member State law
to which the controller is subject. which provides appropriate measures to

protect the data subject's legitimate interestsﬂ; or

(d) (---)280;

(e) where the data must remain conﬁdential in accordance with Union or

Meow?”—283

284
5 (...)
6 (...)

 

279

280

281

282

283

284

UK thought the requirement of a legal obligation was enough and no further appropriate
measures should be required.

The phrase "where the data originate from publicly accessible resources, or" was deleted at
the request of a large number of delegations. CZ, DE, SE and UK emphasised the
importance of this exception given the quantity of data published on the internet. In reaction
Cion indicated that re-instating this phrase would bring the risk of proﬁling without the
subject knowing.

COM and AT reservation on (d) and (e). UK referred to the existence of case law regarding
privilege (conﬁdentiality).

IT said that the information in paragraphs (e) and (f) were set out in Article 8 of the Charter
and always had to be provided and therefore needed to be included in paragraph 1.

CZ proposed to re-insert the text "or because of the overriding legitimate interests of another
person".

DE, on the substance supported by MT, suggested to add a new point (f): "where the data
are processed by a micro enterprise which processes data only as an ancillary activity.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 121
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 15
Right of access for the data subject285

286 287

The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller at reasonable

288

intervals and free of charge (. . .) conﬁrmation as to whether or not personal data

 

. . . 290 .
concerning289 him or her are being processed and where such personal data are being

processed access to the data and the following information:
(a) the purposes of the processing29';

(b) (---)

(c) the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been
or will be disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries& g

. . . . 293
international organisations—;

 

(d) where possible. the envisaged294 period for which the personal data will be

 

stored;

 

285

286
287
288

289

290

291

292

293
294

DE and SE scrutiny reservation. DE, LU and UK expressed concerns on overlaps between
Articles 14 and 15.

FR suggested to add a right of access to processors.

DE suggested to insert "on request".

DE, ES, HU, IT and PL reservation on the possibility to charge a fee. DE and SE thought
that free access once a year should be guaranteed.

FR suggested to change concerning to belonging so that different forms of
telecommunication would be covered. COM said that concerning was used in Article 8 in
the Charter.

DE made a text suggestion (8089/15).

HU thought the legal basis of the processing should be added.

UK reservation on the reference to recipients in third countries. IT thought the concept of
recipient should be clariﬁed, inter alia by clearly excluding employees of the controller.
Presidency suggestion to be consistent with paragraph (1a), Article 14a(d) and 14a(2)(da).
ES and UK proposed adding 'where possible'; FR reservation on 'where possible ' and
'envisaged'; FR emphasised the need of providing an exception to archives.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 122
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectiﬁcation or erasure
of personal data or restriction of the processing of personal data concerning

the data subject or to object to the processing of such personal data;

(f) the right to lodge a complaint to a supervisory authority (.. )295 296-

(g) where the personal data are not collected from the data subject. any available

. . . 297
information as to their source

(h) 298m the case of decisions based on automated processing including proﬁling
referred to in Article 20(1) and ( 3). information concerning the logic
involved299 as well as the Signiﬁcance and envisaged consequences of such

- 300
processmg

1a. Where personal data are transferred to a third country or to an international
organisation. the data subject shall have the right to be informed of the appropriate

safeguards pursuant to Article 42 relating to the transfer301

 

295

296

297
298
299

300

301

DE thought it was too onerous to repeat this for every data subject and pointed to difﬁculties
in ascertaining the competent DPA in its federal structure.

IT and SK suggestion to delete subparagraphs (e) and (f) as under Article 14 this
information should already be communicated to the data subject at the moment of the
collection of the data.

SK scrutiny reservation: subparagraph (g) should be clariﬁed.

PL made a suggestion (8295/15).

PL reservation on the reference to 'logic': the underlying algorithm should not be disclosed.
SE wanted to delete it. BE and IT opposed the deletion of the words logic because it would
go below the level of the 1995 Directive (Article 12(a)). DE reservation on reference to
decisions.

FR harboured doubts on its exact scope.

DE suggested to redraft point (h): " Redraft point (h) as follows: “in case of decisions based
on automated processing including proﬁling referred to in Article 20(1) and (3), knowledge
of and information concerning the logic involved i-n—any—autema—ted—da—ta—preeessi—ng as well
as the signiﬁcance and envisaged consequences of such processing; the right to obtain this
information shall not apply in particular where trade secrets of the controller would be
disclosed.”

FR and UK scrutiny reservation on links with Chapter V.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 123
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1b. On request 302and without an excessive charges“. the controller shall provide a copy

o_f the personal data undergoing processing to the data subject.

2. (...)

Q 304The right to obtain a copy referred to in paragraph 1b (...) shall not apply where
such copy cannot be provided without disclosing personal data of other data subjects
or conﬁdential data of the controller. Furthermore. this right shall not apply if
disclosing personal data would infringe intellectual property rights in relation to

- 305 306 307 308 309
process1ng of those personal data. _ _ .

 

 

302
303

304

305
306

307
308

309

FR made a suggestion for paragraph (1b) in 7464/15.

ES wanted no charge except in case that the costs are very high or that the data subject
requests a special format.

AT, ES: scrutiny reservation.

PT suggested to clarify in a recital that access to intellectual property rights can be obtained
in return for a payment.

DE made a text suggestion (8089/15).

UK suggestion

Cion reservation considering that the paragraph restricts too much the right to obtain a copy
of the personal data and referred to the possibility to restrict this right if the requirements of
Article 21(1)(f) are met..

DE, supported by UK, referred to the danger that data pertaining to a third party might be
contained in such electronic copy.

FR suggested to add "which were not supplied by the data subject to the controller".

DE suggested to add a new paragraph (2a): "There shall be no right of access in accordance
with para-graphs 1 and 1b when data are processed by, or are entrusted to become known to,
a person who is subject to an obligation of professional secrecy regulated by Union or
Member State law or to a statuary obligation of secrecy, except if the data subject is
empowered to lift the secrecy in question and acts accordingly.”

DE suggested a new provision: "There shall be no right of access in accordance with
paragraphs 1 and 1b when data are processed by, or are entrusted to become known to, a
person who is subject to an obligation of professional secrecy regulated by Union or
Member State law or to a statutory obligation, except where the subject is empowered to lift
the secrecy in question and acts accordingly."

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 124
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 3

RECTIFICATION AND ERASURE

Article 16
Right to rectiﬁcation310

(. . .) The data subject shall have the right311 to obtain from the controller m
undue delay312 the rectiﬁcation of personal data concerning him or her which are
inaccurate. Having regard to the purposes for which data were processed. the data
subject shall have the right to obtain completion of incomplete personal data,

including by means of providing a supplementary (. . .) statement.

 

(...)

 

310
311

312

DE and UK scrutiny reservation.

UK, supported by CZ, suggested to insert the qualiﬁcation ' where reasonably practicable'
UK, supported by CZ, also suggested inserting the qualiﬁcation 'where necessary'.
Suggestion from the SE.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 125
DGD2C EN

1.

Article 17

Right to erasure and “to be forgotten ”313

314The (. . .) controller shall have the obligation to erase personal data without undue delay,

 

313

314

SI reservation on "right to be forgotten".

FR, RO, SE: reservation on the applicability to the public sector.

Whereas some Member States have welcomed the proposal to introduce a right to be
forgotten (AT, FR, IE); other delegations were more sceptical as to the feasibility of
introducing a right which would go beyond the right to obtain from the controller the erasure
of one's own personal data (DE and ES). The difﬁculties ﬂowing from the household
exception (UK), to apply such right to personal data posted on social media were
highlighted (BE, DE, FR), but also the impossibility to apply such right to 'paper/ofﬂine'
data was stressed (LU, SI). Some delegations (DE, ES) also pointed to the possible
extemalities of such right when applied with fraudulent intent (e. g. when applying it to the
ﬁnancial sector). Several delegations referred to the challenge to make data subjects active
in an online environment behave responsibly (DE, LU and UK) and queried whether the
creation of such a right would not be counterproductive to the realisation of this challenge,
by creating unreasonable expectations as to the possibilities of erasing data (LU and UK).
Some delegations thought that the right to be forgotten was rather an element of the right to
privacy than part of data protection and should be balanced against the right to remember
and access to information sources as part of the freedom of expression (DE, ES, LU, SI and
UK).

It was pointed out that the possibility for Member States to restrict the right to be forgotten
under Article 21 where it interferes with the freedom of expression is not sufﬁcient to allay
all concerns in that regard as it would be difﬁcult for controllers to make complex
determinations about the balance with the freedom of expression, especially in view of the
stiff sanctions provided in Article 79 (UK). In general several delegations (CZ, DE, FR)
stressed the need for further examining the relationship between the right to be forgotten and
other data protection rights. The Commission emphasised that its proposal was in no way
meant to be a limitation of the freedom of expression. The inherent problems in enforcing
such right in a globalised world outside the EU were cited as well as the possible
consequences for the competitive position of EU companies linked thereto (BE, AT, LU, SE
and SI).

AT made a suggestion to distinguish the right to erasure and the right to be forgotten
(7586/15 REV1).

SE suggested to insert in the beginning of the sentence At the request of the data subject, the
controller ...to indicate that the controller was not supposed to act at its own initiative.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 126
ANNEX DGD2C EN

especially in relation to personal data which are collected when the data subject was a

315 316

child, and the data subject the

shall have the right to obtain from the controller
erasure of personal data concerning him or her without undue delay where one of the

following grounds applies:

(a) the data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they

were collected or otherwise processed;

(b) the data subject withdraws consent on which the processing is based
according to point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2) and (. . .)

there is no other legal ground for the processing of the data; 317

(c) the data subject objects to the processing of personal data318 pursuant to
Article 19(1) and there are no overriding legitimate grounds for the
processing or the data subject objects to the processing of personal data

pursuant to Article 19(2);

 

315
316
317
318

SE wanted to delete the part of the text from without until and the data subject.
Suggestion of DE, supported by Cion.

AT asked if this referred to further processing and wanted that to be clariﬁed in a recital.
NL suggested to refer to a speciﬁc request for erasure pursuant to Article 19(1).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 127
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(d) the data have been unlawfully processedm;

(e) the data have to be erased for compliance with a legal obligation to which the

controller is subject32";

1a The data subject shall have also the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of
personal data concerning him or her. without undue delay. if the data have been
collected in relation to the offering of information society services referred to in

Article 8 1 .&

(...).

 

319
320

321

UK and CZ scrutiny reservation: this was overly broad.

DE pointed to the difﬁculties in determining who is the controller in respect of data who are
copied/made available by other controllers (e. g. a search engine) than the initial controller
(e. g. a newspaper). AT opined that the exercise of the right to be forgotten would have take
place in a gradual approach, ﬁrst against the initial controller and subsequently against the
'secondary' controllers. ES referred to the problem of initial controllers that have
disappeared and thought that in such cases the right to be forgotten could immediately be
exercised against the 'secondary controllers' ES suggested adding in paragraph 2: 'Where the
controller who permitted access to the personal data has disappeared, ceased to exist or
cannot be contacted by the data subject for other reasons, the data subject shall have the
right to have other data controllers delete any link to copies or replications thereof. The
Commission, however, replied that the right to be forgotten could not be exercised against
journals exercising freedom of expression. According to the Commission, the indexation of
personal data by search engines is a processing activity not protected by the freedom of
expression.

PL: reservation considering the reference to children in the introductory part sufﬁcient.

HU reservation considering the restriction to information society services too narrow.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 128
ANNEX DGD2C EN

322

2a. Where the controller (...) has made the personal data public323 and is obliged

pursuant to paragraph 1 to erase the data, the controller. taking account of available
324 326

5

 

technology and the cost of implementation . shallﬁ take (. . .) reasonable steps

including technical measures, (. . .) to inform controllersm which are processing th_e
data, that the data subject has requested the erasure by such controllers of any links

to, or copy or replication of that personal datam.

 

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

BE, DE and SI queried whether this also covered controllers (e.g. a search engine) other than the
initial controller (e.g. a newspaper).

DE suggested to add "or has transmitted them to a recipient".

ES preferred referring to 'expressly or tacitly allowing third parties access to'. IE thought it would be
more realistic to oblige controllers to erase personal data which are under their control, or reasonably
accessible to them in the ordinary course of business, i.e. within the control of those with whom they
have contractual and business relations. BE, supported by IE and LU, also remarked that the E-
Commerce Directive should be taken into account (e.g. through a reference in a recital) and asked
whether this proposed liability did not violate the exemption for information society services
provided in that Directive (Article 12 of Directive 2000/31/EC of 8 June 2000), but COM replied
there was no contradiction. LU pointed to a risk of obliging controllers in an online context to
monitor all data trafﬁc, which would be contrary to the principle of data minimization and in breach
with the prohibition in Article 15 of the E-Commerce Directive to monitor transmitted information.
Further to NL suggestion. This may hopefully also accommodate the DE concern that the reference
to available technology could be read as implying an obligation to always use the latest technology.
FR raised doubts about the fact that the provision was only applicable when the data had been made
public.

CZ, FI, IE, NL, PL, UK, wanted to reinsert "at the request of the data subject" in Artcile 17(3) and
the corresponding recital (54) arguing that the data subject would not know that there is data
concerning him. NL wondered how the controller could know without a request of the data subject
that certain information would need to be erased.

AT, CY, HU, FR, MT, supported by Cion, could accept not having this phrase.

SE suggested clarifying in a recital why the reference to all reasonable steps had not been inserted in
paragraph 1. COM replied that paragraph 1 expressed a results obligation whereas paragraph 2 was
only an obligation to use one's best efforts. ES thought the term should rather be 'proportionate
steps'. DE, ES and BG questioned the scope of this term. ES queried whether there was a duty on
controllers to act proactively with a view to possible exercise of the right to be forgotten. DE warned
against the 'chilling effect' such obligation might have on the exercise of the freedom of expression.
PL, UK wanted to keep "known" controller. UK argued that in order to compare the standards of
Directive 95/46/EC with those of the new regulation need to be considered in light of the explosive
growth of Internet. Moreover, UK pointed out that the directive refers to disproportionate efforts
whereas paragraph 2a of the regulation does not have such a reference; against that background, UK
would consider the limitation to "known" controllers justiﬁed.

PL made two alternative suggestions (8295/15). FR found the obligation on the controller to inform
all controller very heavy and wanted a more balanced text in that respect.

SK suggested to refer instead to controllers with whom the controller has contractual relations.

FR suggested to add "and on which grounds that request was accepted". BE and ES queried whether
this was also possible for the ofﬂine world and BE suggested to clearly distinguish the obligations of
controllers between the online and ofﬂine world. Several Member States (CZ, DE, NL, PL, PT, SE
and SI) had doubts on the enforceability of this rule. ES and PL suggested to delete paragraph 2a.
HU found the content of paragraph (2a) not clear as it refers at the same time to an obligation to
erase data and to cases where the data subject requested erasure. As a result, it is unclear whether the
paragraph applies or not in cases of erasure not on request of the data subject but on other grounds.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 129
ANNEX DGD2C EN

329

3. Paragraphs 1, 1a and 2a shall not apply to the extent that (. . .) processing of the

personal data is necessary:

330 331_

— 5

a. for exercising the right of freedom of expression and information

b. for compliance with a legal obligation which requires processing of 332

 

personal data by Union or Member State law to which the controller is

subject333or for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or

in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controllerm;

 

329

330

331

332
333

334

DE queried whether these exceptions also applied to the abstention from further
dissemination of personal data. AT and DE pointed out that Article 6 contained an absolute
obligation to erase data in the cases listed in that article and considered that it was therefore
illogical to provide for exception in this paragraph.

FR queried whether the right to information should be included in the Article considering
that this right is linked to Article 80 which does not include search engines. In reaction, Pres
argued that the provisions on data controllers apply to search engines. Furthermore, Cion
indicated that the freedom of expression and information is in the Charter and therefore the
reference in Article 17(3)(a) will not change the interpretation of Article 80.

FR suggestion to delete "referred to in Article 80". This would than cover the other FR
suggestion, which was supported by CY, IE, IT, to insert a new point (aa): "for the interest
of the general public to have access to that information". Cion considered that the phrase
"referred to in Article 80" has added value as it indicates that it is up for the Member States
to reconcile in their national law the right to the protection of personal data with freedom of
expression and information.

DE and EE asked why this exception had not been extended to individuals using their own
freedom of expression (e.g. an individual blogger).

FI suggestion, supported by DE and COM, to narrow down the scope.

In general DE thought it was a strange legal construct to lay down exceptions to EU
obligations by reference to national law. S1 was also critical in this regard. UK, supported by
IE, thought there should be an exception for creditworthiness and credit scoring, which is
needed to facilitate responsible lending, as well as for judicial proceedings. IT suggested
inserting a reference to Article 21(1).

AT, PL scrutiny reservation. PL suggested: to add "when expressly laid down by Union or
Member States law".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 130
ANNEX DGD2C EN

c. for reasons of public interest in the area of public health in accordance with
Article 9(2) (10335 and (hb) as well as Article 9(4)”;

d. 337for archiving purposes in the public interest or for scientiﬁc, statistical and

historical (.. .) purposes in accordance with Article 833—38;

e. (...)
f. (...)

g. for the establishment. exercise or defence of legal claims. 3—39

 

335
336

337

338

339

COM thought that (h) should be deleted.

ES and DE indicated that this related to the more general question of how to resolve
differences of view between the data subject and the data controller, especially in cases
where the interests of third parties were at stake. PL asked what was the relation to

Article 21.

FR considered point (d) not needed because of Article 83. Previously, FR has suggested to
move "in the public interests" after "purposes" in order to extend the limitation provided for
archiving purposes to the other purposes.

AT considered a global provision inadequate for applying data protection rules in speciﬁc
cases.

DE suggested: " ..and historical purposes where the erasure would involve disproportionate
effort or processing is essential for those purposes i-n—aeeerdaneeJWi-t-hebrrttele—SS" .Cion
opposed this suggestion considering that it would do away with the obligation in Article 83
to provide safeguards.

DE suggested a new paragraph 3a "Where the erasure is carried out, the controller shall not
otherwise process such data".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 131
ANNEX DGD2C EN

w

Right to restriction of processing

1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller the restriction of

the processing of personal data where:

(a)340 the accuracy of the data is contested by the data subject, for a period enabling

the controller to verify the accuracy of the data34';

(b) the controller no longer needs the personal data for the purposes of the
processing, but they are required by the data subject for the establishment.

exercise or defence of legal claims; or

(c) he or she has objected to processing pursuant to Article 19(1) pending the

veriﬁcation whether the legitimate grounds of the controller override those of

the data subject.

3. Where processing of personal data has been restricted under paragraph 1, such data
may, with the exception of storage, only be processed with the data subject's consent
g for the establishment. exercise or defence of legal claims or for the protection of
the rights of another natural or legal person or for reasons of important public

- 342
interest .

 

340
341
342

FR considered the wording of point (a) ambiguous.
FR scrutiny reservation: FR thought the cases in which this could apply, should be speciﬁed.
DE and SI asked who was to deﬁne the concept of public interest. DE reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 132
ANNEX DGD2C EN

4. A data subject who obtained the restriction of processing pursuant to paragraph 1

(. . .) shall be informed by the controller before the restriction of processing is

iir‘tedﬂ
5. (. . .)
E (. . -)344

 

343

344

DE, PT, SI and IT thought that this paragraph should be a general obligation regarding
processing, not limited to the exercise of the right to be forgotten. FR preferred the previous
version of the text.

Deleted in view of the new article 83.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 133
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 17b

Notiﬁcation obligation regarding rectiﬁcation, erasure or restriction345 346

The controller shall communicate any rectiﬁcation, erasure or restriction of processing
carried out in accordance with Articles 16, 17m and 17a to eachm recipient to whom the
data have been disclosed (...) , unless this proves impossible or involves disproportionate

effort.

 

345

346

347

Whilst several delegations agreed with this proposed draft and were of the opinion that it
added nothing new to the existing obligations under the 1995 Directive, some delegations
(DE, PL, SK) pointed to the possibly far-reaching impact in view of the data multiplication
since 1995, which made it necessary to clearly specify the exact obligations ﬂowing from
this proposed article. Thus, DE, supported by PL, was opposed to a general obligation to log
all the disclosures to recipients. DE, supported by PL, also pointed out that the obligation
should exclude cases where legitimate interests of the data subject would be harmed by a
further communication to the recipients, that is not the case if the recipient would for the
ﬁrst time learn negative information about the data subject in which he has no justiﬁed
interest. BE and ES asked that the concept of a 'disproportionate effort' be clariﬁed in a
recital.

DE suggested a new Article 17c on dispute settlement (7567/15). Supported by IE, FR and
opposed by IT.

DE suggested: "The controller shall inform the data subject about those recipients if the data
subject requests this. "

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 134
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 18

Right to data portability348

 

348

UK reservation: while it supports the concept of data portability in principle, the UK
considers it not within scope of data protection, but in consumer or competition law. Several
other delegations (DE, FR, PL and SE) also wondered whether this was not rather a rule of
competition law and/or intellectual property law or how it related to these ﬁelds of law.
Therefore the UK thinks this article should be deleted.

SI: scrutiny reservation.

CZ thought its scope should be limited to social media.

DE and UK pointed to the risks for the competitive positions of companies if they were to
be obliged to apply this rule unqualiﬁedly and referred to/raises serious issues about
intellectual property and commercial conﬁdentiality for all controllers. DE, FI, HU, SE and
UK also underscored the considerable administrative burdens this article would imply. DE
and FR referred to services, such as health services where the exercise of the right to data
portability might endanger on-going research or the continuity of the service. Reference was
also made to an increased risk of fraud as it may be used to fraudulently obtain the data of
innocent data subjects (UK).

DE, ES, FR, HR, PL and No were in principle supportive of this right. SK thought that the
article was unenforceable and DE, supported by HU, referred to the difﬁculty/impossibility
to apply this right in 'multi-data subject' cases where a single 'copy' would contain data from
several data subjects, who might not necessarily agree or even be known or could not be
contacted, for example group photos. HU therefore questioned the added value of this right.
CZ, DE, DK, FI, R0 and NO thought that the exclusion of the public sector should be
mentioned not only in recital 55, but also here (ES was opposed thereto).

ES, FI, FR,MT (7464/15) and Ro, supported by Cion, wanted data portability to mean the
transmission of data from one controller to another. However, a majority of delegations see
the right to portability as the right to get at copy without hindrance and to transmit that data
to another controller.

FI did not want an obligation for the systems of the controllers between whom data are
transmitted to be interoperable. In response, Cion indicated that such obligation would not
be created as it only concerns a right for a data subject to withdraw.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 135
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2. The data subject shall have the right to receive349 the personal data350 concerning

 

him or herssl, which he or she has provided to a controller352, in a structured andﬂ

commonly used354 @355 machine-readable format and have the right to transmit

those data to another controllerm without hindrance from the controller to which the

 

data have been provided, where

(a) the processing is based on consent pursuant to point (a) of Article 6(1)or point (a)

 

 

of Article 9 (2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of Article 6 (1): and

(b) th_e processing is carried out by automated means357.

 

349

350

351

352

353
354

355
356
357

FI, IT preferred the term withdraw. EL, HU, supported by Cion preferred obtain.

UK reservation on "withdraw" considering that "withdraw" has the connotation of leaving
no data behind and, therefore, duplicates the right to erasure. UK suggested instead "obtain
(a copy for further use)". FR did not agree with the UK views considering it possible to use
the right to erasure and data portability in parallel.

PL suggested to specify that this pertained to personal data in their non-aggregated or non-
modiﬁed form. DE also queried about the scope of this right, in particular whether it could
extend to data generated by the controller or data posted by third persons.

DE, FR wanted to re-insert in Article 18(2) and in recital (5 5) the phrase "and any other
information" considering that not having this phrase would decrease the scope of data
portability too much.

Cion scrutiny reservation.

CZ, DK, HR, SE supported not taking up "and any other related information.

AT suggested instead the term "service provider" making also a suggestion for modiﬁcation
(8089/15).

Consistency of language with Article 15(2).

DE and F1 queried whether this meant the scope was restricted to currently used formats
(excluding future developments) and whether it implied an obligation for controllers to use
one of these commonly used formats.

PT thought 'and' should be deleted.

CZ suggested to delete "and have the right to transmit those data to another controller.

DE, ES and FR thought emphasis should be put on the right to withdraw data, also with a
view to creating an added value as compared to the right to obtain a copy of personal data.
CY and HU also thought the obligation of the controller should be emphasised.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 136
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2a. The exercise of this right shall be without prejudice to Article 17. The right referred

 

to in paragraph 2 shall not apply to processing necessary for the performance of a

 

task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in
358359

 

the controller.

2aa. The right referred to in paragraph 2 shall not apply if disclosing personal data would

infringe intellectual property rights in relation to the processing of those personal

 

mm.
3 ( )361
4 ( )362

 

358

359

360

361

362

IT: scrutiny reservation on last sentence.

CY, EL and Cion suggested instead: "The right referred to in paragraph 2 shall not apply to
processing carried out by public authorities or bodies".

FR preferred wording related to the public purpose rather than to the public bodies.

Cion reservation

ES thought there should be an exception in case disproportionate efforts would be required.
PL reservation on deletion

BE thought that standard contractual clauses should always remain facultative.

Deleted in view of the new Article 83.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 137
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 4

RIGHT TO OBJECT AND AUTOMATED INDIVIDUAL DECISION MAKING ( . . .)

Article 19
Right to object363

1. 364The data subject shall have the right to object, on365 grounds relating to his or her
particular situations“, at any time to the processing of personal data concerning him
or_her which is based on point§ (. . .) (g) g (f) ofArticle 6(1), the ﬁrst sentence of
Article 6(4) in conjunction with point (e) of Article 6(1) or the second sentence of
Article 6 4 m.

 

 

363

364
365

366

367

AT made a suggestion for modiﬁcation (8089/15).

FR made suggestions to modify Article 19 (7464/15). Furthermore, FR wanted data subjects
to have the right to object in case of processing for purposes covered by Article 9(2)(i)
unless this processing is done for public interest purposes.

PL did not want a right to object in relation to processing referred to in Article 83.

F1, IE, UK suggested to use the wording of Article 14 of the directive currently in force.

CZ, DE, FI, IE, UK reservation on deletion of "compelling legitimate" in Article 19(1).
However, these delegations could accept re-insertion of (e) provided re-insertion of
"compelling legitimate". CZ suggested: "1. The data subject shall have the right to object, at
any time: (a) on compelling legitimate grounds to the processing of personal data
concerning him or her which is based on point (e) of Article 6(1), (b) on grounds relating to
his or her particular situation to the processing of personal data concerning him or her which
is based on point (f) of Article 6(1).

AT, DK, FR, MT, PL rejected having "compelling legitimate" in the ﬁrst line of the
proposal in document 7978/1/15 REV1.Cion considered" compelling legitimate" not
acceptable given Article 6(1)(f) and because it undermines making use of the right to object.
This wording would allow that even compelling legitimate grounds of the data subject could
be overridden by the controller; this would go below the protection level of Directive 96/46.
The reference to point (e) of Article 6(1) was restored in view of the support of PL, IT, DK,
ES, DE, Ro, SI, AT, EL, CY. Including (e) was objected by UK, DE, BE, CZ, FI, HU

and NL.

COM stated that 1995 Directive contained a reference to point (e). UK, supported by DE,
queried whether the right to object would still apply in a case where different grounds for
processing applied simultaneously, some of which are not listed in Article 6. ES and LU
queried why Article 6(1) (c) was not listed here. ES asked that a reference to Article 6(2) be
added.

AT suggested to delete "relating to his or her particular situation" because the right to object
is a fundamental human right.

New Presidency suggestion

AT, HU, IT, LT expressed that a reference to Article 6(4) was not sufﬁcient to take away
their reservation on Article 6(4) as such.

HU suggested to make also a reference to Article 9(2).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 138
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The controller shall no longer process the personal data (. . .)_unless the controller

 

demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds368 for the processing which override the

interests, (. . .) rights and freedoms of the data subject369 or for the establishment,

. . 370371
exerczse or defence of legal claims.

 

 

368

369

370

371

DE: scrutiny reservation.

IE suggested instead reasoned legal grounds" or using the text of the directive currently in
force.

SE scrutiny reservation: SE queried the need to put the burden of proof on the controller
regarding the existence of compelling legitimate grounds. DE and F1 queried the need for
new criteria, other than those from the 1995 Directive. COM stressed that the link with the
'particular situation' was made in order to avoid narrow objections. CZ also stated that this
risked making processing of data an exceptional situation due to the heavy burden of proof.
SE queried whether the right would also allow objecting to any processing by third parties.
Moved from paragraph (1a). UK proposed adding ' for demonstrating compliance with the
obligations imposed under this instrument'. This might also cover the concern raised by DE
that a controller should still be able to process data for the execution of a contract if the data
were obtained further to a contractual legal basis. CZ, DK, IT, SE and UK have likewise
emphasised the need for allowing to demonstrate compliance. CZ and SK also referred to
the possibility of further processing on other grounds.

FR suggested to insert a new paragraph lab in order to allow data subjects to object to the
further processing of his/her data based on Article 6(4). “Where the controller intends to
further process the data on the basis of Article 6, paragraph 4 for other purposes than the one
for which the data were collected, the possibility of the right to object shall be brought
explicitly to the attention of the data subject and where an objection is upheld, the personal
data shall no longer be processed.”

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 139
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1a. (...)

2. Where personal data are processed for direct marketing372 purposes, the data subject
shall have the right to obj ect373 (. . .) at any time to the processing of personal data

concerning him or her for such marketing. At the latest at the time of the ﬁrst
374 375 376

 

communication with the data subject . this right shall be explicitly brought to
the attention of the data subject (. . .) M shall be presented clearly and separately

from any other information377.

Q Where the data subject objects to the processing for direct marketing purposes. the

personal data shall no longer be processed for such purposes.

 

372

373

374

375

376

377

FR and UK underlined the need to have clarity regarding the exact content of this concept,
possibly through a deﬁnition of direct marketing. DE asked which cases were covered
exactly.

DE suggested to insert: "free of charge".

IT preferred "prior to processing".

Suggestion by BE opposed by IE.

DE, supported by PL and preliminary BE suggested instead: "In approaching the data
subject,".

DE suggestion, supported by COM, to inform the data subject as soon as possible of the
right to object.

At the request of several delegations (FR, LT, PT), COM conﬁrmed that this paragraph was
not meant to create an opt-in system and that the E-Privacy Directive would remain
unaffected. DE feels there is a need to clarify the relationship between Article 19(2) on the
one hand and Article 6(1)(f) and Article 6(4) on the other. It can be concluded from the right
to object that direct marketing without consent is possible on the basis of a weighing of
interests. On the other hand, Article 6(1)(f) no longer refers to the interests of third parties
and Article 6(4) also no longer refers to Article 6(1)(f) in regard to data processing which
changes the original purpose. DE is therefore of the opinion that this also needs to be
clariﬁed in view of online advertising and Directive 2002/5 8/EC and Article 89 of the
Proposal for a Regulation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 140
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2aa. Where personal data are processed for historical. statistical or scientiﬁc purposes the
data subject. on grounds relating to his or her particular situation. shall have the right

to object to processing of personal data concerning him or her. unless the processing

is necessary for the performance of a task carried out for reasons of public interestﬂ

ﬂ

 

378

379

Reservation: AT, CZ, ES, LT, PT doubting the need for this paragraph. AT, PT noted that a
data subject that ﬁnds out that a historical document is fake must have the possibility to
object. Furthermore, given that statistics present aggregated data there is less of a protection
need. CZ missed speciﬁcities about what the public interest is (supported by F1) and who is
going to make the assessment. In response, Cion indicated that Article 6(3) speciﬁes the
determination what is in the public interest, namely Union or national law.

BE, NL scrutiny reservation. NL noted that processing can also be done in the public
interests and for gainful purposes at the same time, for instance development of new
pharmaceutical cures.

DE could accept the text of paragraph (2aa) provided that Article 6(2) remained unchanged.
FI positive provided that Article 6 and 9 remain unchanged.

SE suggested to replace "performance of a task carried out for reasons of public interest"
with "fulﬁlment of these speciﬁc purposes".

FR, HR, UK considered the references to public interest at the beginning and the end of the
paragraph to be inconsistent.

FR proposal to insert a new paragraph: 2b ,,Where personal data are processed for historical,
statistical or scientiﬁc purposes on the basis of point (i) of Article 9(2), the data subject shall
have the right to object at any time to the processing of personal data concerning him or her,
unless the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out for reasons of
public interest. Prior to the processing, this right shall be explicitly brought to the attention
of the data subject and shall be presented clearly and separately from any other information
and where an objection is upheld, the personal data shall no longer be processed.

IE wanted to keep at the end of the paragraph the phrase: "_or for compliance with a legal
obligation to which the controller is subject". AT wanted to delete the paragraph and SE had
serious concerns.

FR, SI, requested clariﬁcation what was meant by a legal obligation: a basis in Union or
national law or also for example a contract?

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 141
ANNEX DGD2C EN

l.-h

(...)

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 142
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 20
Automated individual decision making380

 

1. The data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision ( . . .)381based

 

solely382 on automated processing. including proﬁling383. which produces legal

85 386

eﬂects concerning him or her or 384signiﬁcantly 3 affects him or her.—

 

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

DE, ES, FR, AT, HU, PL, SE and UK scrutiny reservation.

DE found further changes needed to avoid that the Article would result in discrimination.
AT suggested: "Decision making based on automated personal processing".

IT, supported by PT, reservation considering the concept of proﬁling laid down in the
Presidency text too narrow. IT wanted to re-insert a deﬁnition of "proﬁle" and to modify the
deﬁnition of "proﬁling" in line with the ideas of the Council of Europe report of 2010.

AT suggested to dispense with the concepts of proﬁling and proﬁle in the text.

DE made a suggestion to add paragraphs to Article 20 (8089/15).

DE thinks this provision must take account of two aspects, namely, whether and under what
conditions a proﬁle (= the linking of data which permits statements to be made about a data
subject’s personality) may be created and further processed, and, secondly, under what
conditions a purely automated measure based on that proﬁle is permissible if the measure is
to the particular disadvantage of the data subject. It appears expedient to include two
different rules in this regard. According to DE Article 20 only covers the second aspect and
DE would like to see a rule included on proﬁling in regard to procedures for calculating the
probability of speciﬁc behaviour (cf. Article 28b of the German Federal Data Protection
Act, which requires that a scientiﬁcally recognized mathematical/statistical procedure be
used which is demonstrably essential as regards the probability of the speciﬁc behaviour).
ES was not favourable to the new drafting and asked that the objective was. DE stressed that
it was important to look at the deﬁnition of proﬁling in order to ensure consistency. IT said
that the way the Article was drafted it dealt with decisions based on proﬁling and not
proﬁling as a technique. IT noted that for example ﬁngerprints and exchanges between
machines would be more common in the future.

ES wanted to delete the words from a decision until him or her.

PL suggested "predominantly" instead of "solely".

AT suggested to delete proﬁling and replace it with "such" (8089/15).

Scrutiny reservation: SI.

CZ suggested to insert "similarly". In reaction, Cion indicated this would lower data
protection standards.

PL suggested to clarify in a recital the meaning of "signiﬁcantly affects him or her".

DE and PL wondered whether automated data processing was the right criterion for
selecting high risk data processing operations and provided some examples of automated
data processing operation which it did not consider as high risk. DE and ES pointed out that
there are also cases of automated data processing which actually were aimed at increasing
the level of data protection (e. g. in case of children that are automatically excluded from
certain advertising). IT was concerned about the word signiﬁcantly and wanted it clariﬁed in
a recital. COM meant that it could be clariﬁed in a recital.

DE meant that the title and deﬁnition in Article 4(12a) required a particular need for
clariﬁcation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 143
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1a. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if the decision387: (...)

(a) is necessagy for entering into, or performance of, a contract between the data

subject and a data controller (. . .); or

(b) is (. . .) authorized by Union or Member State law to which the controller is
subject and which also lays down suitable measures to safeguard the data
subject's rights and freedoms and legitimate interests; or

(c) is based on the data subject's explicit consent (. . .).

Q. In cases referred to in paragraph 1a (a) and (c)388 the data controller shall implement

suitable measures to safeguard the data subject’s rights and freedoms and legitimate

389

interests. at least the right to obtain human intervention on the part of the

controller. to express his or her point of view and to contest the decision:

 

 

2 (. . .)
387 COM suggestion.
388 IE suggestion.
PL suggested instead to refer to "Article (1a)".
389 BE suggestion, supported by FR.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 144

ANNEX DGD2C EN

390

 

 

 

 

 

; Decisions referred to in paragraph 1a shall not (. . .) be based on special categories
of personal data referred to in Article 9(1). unless points (a) or (g)391 of Article 9(2)
apply and suitable measures to safeguard the data subject's rights and freedoms and
legitimate interests 392 are in place.

4. (. . .)

393

5. (. . .)

 

390
391

SK considered the paragraph to provide insufﬁcient guarantees.

UK did not want to limit processing to only points (a) or (g) so it suggested to delete the
reference to points (a) and (g) whereas HU wanted to add point (c).

392 BE, FR, IT, PL, PT, AT, SE and UK reservation FR and AT reservation on the compatibility
with the E-Privacy Directive. BE would prefer to reinstate the term 'solely based', but FR
and DE had previously pointed out that 'not solely' could empty this prohibition of its
meaning by allowing sensitive data to be proﬁled together with other non-sensitive personal
data. DE would prefer to insert a reference to a the use of pseudonymous data.

 

393 DE suggested new paragraphs 4-6 (75 86/15) because of particular constitutional
sensitivities.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 145

ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 5
RESTRICTIONS

Article 21

- - 394
Restrictions

Union or Member State law to which the data controller or processor is subject may restrict
by way of a legislative measure the scope of the obligations and rights provided for in (. . .)
Articles Q to 20 and Article 32, as well as Article 5395 in so far as its provisions correspond
to the rights and obligations provided for in Articles 12 to 20. when such a restriction

constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard:
(aa) national security;
(ab) defence;

(a) public security;

(b) the prevention, investigation, detection 1 prosecution of criminal offences396 or the

execution of criminal penalties or the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats

to public securi‘gy;

 

394

395
396

DE suggested a new recital (48a) (7586/1/15 REV1).

AT recalled the note of AT, SI, HU to the 3354th Council.

SI and UK scrutiny reservation.

SE and UK wondered why paragraph 2 of Article 13 of the 1995 Data Protection Directive
had not been copied here. DE, supported by HU, RO, PT and SI, stated that para. 1 should not
only permit restrictions of the rights of data subjects but also their extension. For example,
Article 20(2)(b) requires that Member States lay down 'suitable measures to safeguard the
data subject’s legitimate interests', which, when they take on the form of extended rights of
access to information as provided for under German law in the case of proﬁling to asses
creditworthiness (credit scoring), go beyond the Proposal for a Regulation.

AT reservation.

The wording of points (b), and possibly also point (a), will have to be discussed again in the
future in the light of the discussions on the relevant wording of the text of the Data Protection
Directive for police and judicial cooperation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 146
ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) other important objectives of general public interests of the Union or of a Member State,
in particular an important economic or ﬁnancial interest of the Union or of a Member
State, including, monetary, budgetary and taxation matters, public health and social
security, the protection of market stability and integrity;
(ca) the protection of judicial independence and judicial proceedings;
(d) the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of breaches of ethics for
regulated professions;
(e) a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, with the
exercise of ofﬁcial authority in cases referred to in (aa), (ab), (a), (b), (c) and (d);
(f) the protection of the data subject or the rights and freedoms of others;
(g) the enforcement of civil law claims.
2. Any legislative measure referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain speciﬁc provisions at least,
where relevant. as to the purposes of the processing or categories of processing. the categories
of personal data. the scope of the restrictions introduced. the speciﬁcation of the controller g
categories of controllers. the storage periods and the applicable safeguards taking into account
the nature. scope and purposes of the processing or categories of processing and the risks for
the rights and freedoms of data subjects.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 147
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER IV
CONTROLLER AND PROCESSOR397

SECTION 1
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS

Article 22
Obligations of the controller

Taking into account the nature. scope context and purposes of the processing as well
as the likelihood and severity of risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals. the
controller shall (. . .) implement appropriate measures and be able to demonstrate that

the processing of personal data is performed in compliance with this Regulation.

(...)

Where proportionate in relation to the processing activities398. the measures referred
to in paragraph 1 shall include the implementation of appropriate data protection

policies by the controller.

Adherence to approved codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38 or an approved
certiﬁcation mechanism pursuant to Article 39 may be used as an element to

demonstrate compliance with the obligations of the controller.

(...)
(...)

 

397

398

S1 and UK scrutiny reservation on the entire chapter. BE, DE, NL and UK have not been not
convinced by the ﬁgures provided by COM according to which the reduction of
administrative burdens doing away with the general notiﬁcation obligation on controllers,
outbalanced any additional administrative burdens and compliance costs ﬂowing from the
proposed Regulation.

HU, R0 and PL thought this wording allowed too much leeway to controllers. AT thought
that in particular for the respects to time limits and the reference to the proportionality was

 

problematic.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 148
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1.

Article 23
Data protection by design and by default

(. . .) Having regard to available technology and the cost of implementation ﬂ

taking account of the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing as well

 

as the likelihood and severity of the risk for rights and freedoms of individuals posed

 

by the processing, the controllers shall implement (. . .) technical and organisational
measures appropriate to the processing activity being carried out and its objectives.

. . . . 399 . . 400 .
such as data minimisation and pseudonymisation . in such a way that the

 

processing will meet the requirements of this Regulation and protect the rights of

(. . .) data subjects.

The controller shall implement appropriate measures for ensuring that, by default,
only (. . .) personal data (. . .) which are necessa m for each speciﬁc purpose of the
processing are processed: this applies to th_e amount of (. . .) data collected, the extent

of their processing. the period of their storage and their accessibility. Where th_e

 

purpose of the processing is not intended to provide the public with information.

 

those mechanisms shall ensure that by default personal data are not made accessible

without human intervention to an indeﬁnite number of individuals.

An approved certiﬁcation mechanism pursuant to Article 39 may be used as an

 

element to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in paragraphs 1

and 2.

 

(...)
(...)

 

399
400

401

IT scrutiny reservation.

DE thought that, in view of Article 5(c), the principle of data economy and avoidance, as
well as anonymisation and pseudonymisation should be listed as key options for
implementation. This debate will however need to take place in the context of a debate on
pseudonymi sing personal data.

PL: scrutiny reservation on provisions concerning pseudonymisation.

CZ would prefer "not excessive". This term may be changed again in the future in the
context of the debate on the wording of Article 5(1)(c).

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 149
DGD2C EN

Article 24
Joint controllers402
Where two or more controllers jointly determine the purposes and means of the
processing of personal data. they are joint controllers. They shall in a transparent
manner determine their respective responsibilities for compliance with the
obligations under this Regulation, in particular as regards the (. . .) exercising o_f the
rights of the data subject and their respective duties to provide the information

referred to in Articles 14 and 14a. by means of an arrangement between them unless

 

and in so far as. the respective responsibilities of the controllers are determined by
Union or Member State law to which the controllers are subject. The arrangement
shall designate which of the joint controllers shall act as single point of contact for

data subjects to exercise their rights.

Irrespective of the terms of the arrangement referred to in paragraph 1. the data
subject may exercise his or her rights under this Regulation in respect of and against

each of the (. . .) controllers.

The arrangement shall duly reﬂect the joint controllers’ respective effective roles and
relationships vis-a-vis data subjects. and the essence of the arrangement shall be
made available for the data subject. Paragraph 2 does not apply where the data
subject has been informed in a transparent and unequivocal manner which of the
joint controllers is responsible. unless such arrangement other than one determined

by Union or Member State law is unfair with regard to his or her rights (. . .).

 

402

S1 reservation; it warned against potential legal conﬂicts on the allocation of the liability and
SI therefore thought this article should be further revisited in the context of the future debate
on Chapter VIII. FR also thought the allocation of liability between the controller and the
processor is very vague and CZ expressed doubts about the enforceability of this provision
in the private sector outside arrangements within a group of undertakings and thought it
should contain a safeguard against outsourcing of responsibility.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 150
DGD2C EN

Article 25

Representatives of controllers not established in the Union

1. Where Article 3(2) applies, the controller shall designate in writing a representative

in the Union.
2. This obligation shall not apply to:

(a) (...); or

(b) processing which is occasional403 and unlikely to result in a (. . .) risk for the

 

rights and ﬁeedoms of individuals, taking into account the nature, context,

 

scope and purposes of the processing (. . .); or

 

(C) a public authority or body;

(01) (---)

3. The representative shall be established in one of those Member States where the data
subjects whose personal data are processed in relation to the offering of goods or

services to them, or whose behaviour is monitored, reside.

g The representative shall be mandated by the controller to be addressed in addition to

 

or instead of the controller by. in particular. supervisory authorities and data subjects.

 

on all issues related to the processing of personal data. for the purposes of ensuring

 

compliance with this Regulation.

 

4. The designation of a representative by the controller shall be without prejudice to

legal actions which could be initiated against the controller itself.

 

403 HU, SE and UK reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 151
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1.

Article 26

Processor
(. . .).404 The controller shall use only processor§ providing sufﬁcient guarantees to
implement appropriate technical and organisational measures (. . .) in such a way that

the processing will meet the requirements of this Regulation (. . .).

The processor shall not enlist another processor without the prior speciﬁc or general

 

written consent of the controller. In the latter case. the processor should always

 

inform the controller on any intended changes concerning the addition or

 

replacement of other processors. thereby giving the opportunity to the controller to

 

object to such changes405.

 

(...)406.

The carrying out of processing by a processor shall be governed by a contract M

legal act under Union or Member State law binding the processor to the controller.

 

setting out the subject-matter and duration of the processing the nature and purpose

 

of the processing. the type of personal data and categories of data subjects. the rights

 

of the controller (. . .) and stipulating, in particular that the processor shall:

(a) process the personal data only on instructions from the controller (. . .), unless
required to do so by Union or Member State law to which the processor is

subject: in such a case. the processor shall inform the controller of that legal

 

requirement before processing the data. unless that law prohibits such

 

information on important grounds of public interest;

 

 

404

405
406

The Presidency suggest completing Article 5(2) with the words "also in case of personal
data being processed on its behalf by a processor". This may also need further discussion in
the context of the future debate on liability in the context of Chapter VIII.

F1 was concerned that this might constitute an undue interference with contractual freedom.
Several delegations (CZ, AT, LU) pointed to the need to align this with the rules in Article
77. The discussion on the exercise of data subjects rights should indeed take place in the

 

context of Chapter VIII.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 152
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b)
(C)
(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(...)

take all (. . .) measures required pursuant to Article 30;

respect the conditions for enlisti_ng another processor (. . .), such as a

requirement of speciﬁc prior permission of the controller;

(. . .) taking into account the nature of the processing, assist the controller in
respondi_ng to requests for exercising the data subject’s rights laid down in
Chapter III;

(. . .) assist the controller in ensuring compliance with the obligations pursuant

to Articles 30 to 34;

return or delete, at the choice of the controller, the personal data upon the
termination of the provision of data processing services speciﬁed in the
contract or other legal act. unless there is a requirement to store the data

under Union or Member State law to which the processor is subject;

make available to the controller (. . .) all information necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the obligations laid down in this Article and allow for and

contribute to audits conducted by the controller.

The processor shall immediately inform the controller if. in his opinion. an

instruction breaches this Regulation or Union or Member State data protection

provisions.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 153
DGD2C EN

2a. Where a processor enlists (. . .) another processor for carrying out speciﬁc processing
activities on behalf of the controller. the same data protection obligations as set out
in the contract or other legal act between the controller and the processor as referred
to in paragraph 2 shall be imposed on that other processor by way of a contract or
other legal act under Union or Member State law407. in particular providing
sufﬁcient guarantees to implement appropriate technical and organisational measures
in such a way that the processing will meet the requirements of this Regulation.
Where that other processor fails to fulﬁl its data protection obligations. the initial

processor shall remain fully liable to the controller for the performance of that other

processor's obligations.

2aa. Adherence of the processor to an approved code of conduct pursuant to Article 38 or

408

an approved certiﬁcation mechanism pursuant to Article 39 may be used as an

element to demonstrate sufﬁcient guarantees referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2a.

@. Without prejudice to an individual contract between the controller and the processor.
the contract or the other legal act referred to in paragraphs 2 and 2a may be based. in
whole or in part. on standard contractual clauses referred to in paragraphs 2b and 2c
or on standard contractual clauses which are part of a certiﬁcation granted to the

controller or processor pursuant to Articles 39 and 39a.

 

407

408

HU suggested qualifying this reference to EU or MS law by adding 'binding that other
processor to the initial processor'.

FR reservation; SK suggested specifying that where the other processor fails to fulﬁl its data
protection obligations under such contract or other legal act, the processor shall remain fully
liable to the controller for the performance of the other processor’s obligation. By
authorising the processor to subcontract itself and not obliging the sub-processor to have a
contractual relationship with the controller, it should ensure enough legal certainty for the
controller in terms of liability. The principle of liability of the main processor for any
breaches of sub-processor is provided in clause 11 of Model clause 2010/87 and BCR
processor and is therefore the current standard. It also suggested deleting the reference to
Article 2aa.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 154
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2b.

2c.

The Commission may lay down standard contractual clauses for the matters referred

to in paragraph 2 and 2a and in accordance with the examination procedure referred

to in Article 87(2) E

A supervisory authority may adopt standard contractual clauses for the matters

referred to in paragraph 2 and 2a and in accordance with the consistency mechanism

referred to in Article 57.

The contract or the other legal act referred to in paragraphs 2 and 2a shall be in

writing including in an electronic form.

(...)

(. . -)410

Article 27

Processing under the authority of the controller and processor

(...)

 

 

40” RO suggested deletion.
PL was worried about a scenario in which the Commission would not act. CY and FR were
opposed to conferring this role to COM (FR could possibly accept it for the EDPB).
41" COM reservation on deletion.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 155
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 28

. . . . . 411
Records of categories of personal data process1ng acttwttes

1. Each controller (. . .) and, if any, the controller's representative, shall maintain a record

o_f all categories of personal data processing activities under its responsibility. This

record shall contain (. . .) the following information:

(a)

(b)
(C)

(d)

(f)

(g)

(h)

the name and contact details of the controller and any joint controller (. . .),

controller’s representative and data protection ofﬁcer. if any;

 

(...)

the purposes of the processing, including the legitimate interest when the

processing is based on Article 6(1)(f);

a description of categories of data subjects and of the categories of personal

data relating to them;

the (. . .) categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or will

 

be disclosed. in particular recipients in third countries:

where applicable, the categories of transfers of personal data to a third

country or an international organisation (. . .);

where possible. the envisaged time limits for erasure of the different

categories of data.

where possible. a general description of the technical and organisational

security measures referred to in Article 30(1).

 

 

4'1 AT scrutiny reservation.
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 156
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2a. Each processor shall maintain a record of all categories of personal data processing

 

activities carried out on behalf of a controller. containing:

 

 

(g) the name and contact details of the processor or processors and of each

controller on behalf of which the processor is acting and of the controller's

representative, if any;

 

 

 

(p) the name and contact details of the data protection ofﬁcer. if any:
(p) the categories of processing carried out on behalf of each controller;
(Q) where applicable. the categories of transfers of personal data to a third

 

country or an international organisation;

 

(p) where possible. a general description of the technical and organisational

 

security measures referred to in Article 30(1).

 

3a. The records referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2a shall be in writing including in an

 

electronic or other non-legible form which is capable of being converted into a legible

 

form.

3. On request, the controller and the processor and, if any, the controller's representative,

shall make the record available (. . .) to the supervisory authority.

4. The obligations referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2a shall not apply ‘9:

 

(a) (---);

(b) an enterprise or a body employing fewer than 250 persons, unless the

processing it carries out is likely to result in a high risk for the rights and

 

freedoms of data subject such as (. . .) discrimination. identity theft or fraud.

 

 

unauthorized reversal of pseudonymisationm. ﬁnancial loss. damage to the

 

reputation. loss of conﬁdentiality of data protected by professional secrecy or

 

any other economic or social disadvantage for the data subjects. taking into

 

account the nature. scope. context and purposes of the processing;

 

 

4'2 AT, ES, IT, FR, NL, PL scrutiny reservation as regards pseudonymisation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 157
ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

5. (. . .)
6. (. . .)
Article 29
Co-operation with the supervisory authority
(. . .)
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 158
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 2
DATA SECURITY

Article 30

Security of processing

1. Having regard to available technology and the costs of implementation and taking into
account the nature. scope. context and purposes of the processing as well as the
likelihood and severity of the risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals. the
controller and the processor shall implement appropriate technical and organisational
measures, such as (. . .) pseudonymisation of personal data to ensure a level of security

appropriate to the risk.

1a In assessing the appropriate level of security account shall be taken in particular of the
risks that are presented by data processing (. . .), in particular from accidental or
unlawful destruction. loss. alteration. unauthorised disclosure of. or access to personal

data transmitted. stored or otherwise processed.

2a. Adherence to approved codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38 or an approved
certiﬁcation mechanism pursuant to Article 39 may be used as an element to

demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in paragraph 1.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 159
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2b. The controller and processor shall take steps to ensure that any person acting under

 

the authority of the controller or the processor who has access to personal data shall

 

not process them except on instructions from the controller. unless he or she is

 

required to do so by Union or Member State law.

 

Article 31

Notiﬁcation of a personal data breach to the supervisory authority413

1. In the case of a personal data breach which is likely to result in a high risk for the

 

rights and freedoms of individuals. such as discrimination. identity theft or fraud.

 

ﬁnancial loss. unauthorized reversal of pseudonymisation. damage to the reputation.

 

loss of conﬁdentiality of data protected by professional secrecy or any other

 

 

signiﬁcant economic or social disadvantage. the controller shall without undue delay
and, where feasible, not later than 2 hours after having become aware of it, notify the

personal data breach to the supervisory authority competent in accordance with

 

Article 51. The notiﬁcation to the supervisory authority shall be accompanied by a

reasoned justiﬁcation in cases where it is not made within 2 hours.

1a. The notiﬁcation referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be required if a communication to

the data subject is not required under Article 32(3)( a) and (b)4'4.

 

 

2. (. . .) The processor shall notify the controller without undue delay after becoming

 

aware of a personal data breach.

 

413 AT and SI scrutiny reservation. COM reservation: the consistency with the E-Privacy

Directive regime should be safeguarded; SI thought this alignment could be achieved by
deleting "high" before "risk" in Articles 31 and 32.

4'4 AT and PL thought this paragraph should be deleted.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 160
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. The notiﬁcation referred to in paragraph 1 must at least:

(a) describe the nature of the personal data breach including, where possible and

appropriate. the approximate categories and number of data subjects

 

concerned and the categories and approximate number of data records

concerned;

(b) communicate the identity and contact details of the data protection ofﬁcer or

other contact point where more information can be obtained;

(c) (. . .)

(d) describe the likely consequences of the personal data breach identiﬁed by the
controller;

(e) describe the measures taken or proposed to be taken by the controller to

 

address the personal data breach; ad

(f) where appropriate. indicate measures to mitigate the possible adverse effects

of the personal data breach.

 

3a. Where. and in so far as. it is not possible to provide the information referred to in
paragraph 3 (d). (e) and (f) at the same time as the information referred to in points

(a) and (b) of paragraph 3. the controller shall provide this information without

undue further delay.

4. The controller shall document any personal data breaches referred to in paragraphs 1

 

and 2, comprising the facts surrounding the breach, its effects and the remedial
action taken. This documentation must enable the supervisory authority to verify

compliance with this Article. (. . .).

6. (....)415

 

415 COM, supported by IT, reservation on deletion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 161
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 32

Communication of a personal data breach to the data subject416

1. When the personal data breach is likely to result in a high risk for the rights and
freedoms of individuals. such as discrimination. identity theft or fraud. ﬁnancial loss.
damage to the reputation. unauthorized reversal of pseudonymisation. loss of
conﬁdentiality of data protected by professional secrecy or any other signiﬁcant
economic or social disadvantage. the controller shall (. . .) communicate the personal

data breach to the data subject without undue delay.

2. The communication to the data subject referred to in paragraph 1 shall describe the
nature of the personal data breach and contain at least the information and the

recommendations provided for in points (b), (p) and (f) of Article 31(3).

3. The communication (. . .) to the data subject referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be

 

required if:

a. the controller (. . .)has implemented appropriate technological ad
organisational protection measures and those measures were applied to the
data affected by the personal data breach, in particular those that render the

data unintelligible to any person who is not authorised to access it such as

:—

enctyption; or

b. the controller has taken subsequent measures which ensure that the high risk
for the rights and freedoms of data subjects referred to in paragraph 1 is no

longer likely to materialise: or

 

 

41" AT scrutiny reservation. COM reservation: the consistency with the E-Privacy Directive

regime should be safeguarded.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 162
ANNEX DGD2C EN

c. it would involve disproportionate effort. in particular owing to the number
of cases involved. In such case. there shall instead be a public
communication or similar measure whereby the data subjects are informed

in an equally effective manner: or

 

d. it would adversely affect a substantial public interest.
4 (. . .)
5 (. . .)
6. (. . .)417

 

417

COM, supported by IT, reservation on deletion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 163
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 3
DATA PROTECTION IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND PRIOR
CONSULTATION

Article 33

Data protection impact assessment 4'8

1. Where a type of processing. in particular using new technologies. and taking into
account the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing, is likely to result

in a high4'9_risk for the rights and freedoms of individuals. such as discrimination.

identity theft or fraud. ﬁnancial loss. damage to the reputation. unauthorized reversal
of pseudonymisation. loss of conﬁdentiality of data protected by professional secrecy
or any other signiﬁcant economic or social disadvantage, the controller (. . .)420 shall,
prior to the processing, carry out an assessment of the impact of the envisaged

processing operations on the protection of personal data. (. . .).

 

418 FR, HU, AT and COM expressed doubts on the concept of new types of processing, which

is now clariﬁed in recital 70. UK thought this obligation should not apply where there is an
overriding public interest for the processing to take place (such as a public health
emergency).

FR, R0 and UK warned against the considerable administrative burdens ﬂowing from the
proposed obligation. The UK considers that any requirements to carry out a data protection
impact assessment should be limited to those cases where there is an identiﬁed high risk to
the rights of data subjects.

COM reservation on deletion.

419

420

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 164
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1a. The controller shall seek the advice of the data protection ofﬁcer. where designated.

when carrying out a data protection impact assessment.

2. A data protection impact assessment referred to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be

required in the following cases:

(a) a systematic and extensive evaluation (. . .) of personal aspects relating to (. . .)
natural person§ (. . .), which is based on proﬁling and on which decisions421
are based that produce legal effects concerning data subjects or severely
affect data subjects;

422

5

(b) processing of special categories of personal data under Article 9(1) (. . .)
biometric data or data on criminal convictions and offences or related
security measures, where the data are processed for taking (. . .) decisions

regarding speciﬁc individuals on a large scale ;

(c) monitoring publicly accessible areas on a large scale, especially when using

optic-electronic devices (. . .);
(d) (- - -);
(e) (. . .)423.

a The supervisory authority shall establish and make public a list of the kind of
processing operations which are subject to the requirement for a data protection
impact assessment pursuant to paragraph 1. The supervisory authority shall

communicate those lists to the European Data Protection Board. ﬂ

 

 

42’ In the future this wording will be aligned to the eventual wording of Article 20.

422 HU suggested that data pertaining to children be also reinserted.

423 FR scrutiny reservation. PL thought a role could be given to the EDPB in order to determine
high-risk operations.

424 CZ reservation.HU wondered what kind of legal consequences, if any, would be triggered
by the listing of a type of processing operation by a DPA with regard to on-going processing
operations as well as what its territorial scope would be. In the view of the Presidency any
role for the EDPB in this regard should be discussed in the context of Chapter VII.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 165

ANNEX DGD2C EN

The supervisory authority may also establish and make public a list of the kind of
processing operations for which no data protection impact assessment is required.

The supervisory authority shall communicate those lists to the European Data

 

Protection Board.

Prior to the adoption of the lists referred to in paragraphs 2a and 2b the competent
supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57

where such lists involve processing activities which are related to the offering of

 

goods or services to data subjects or to the monitoring of their behaviour in several

Member States. or may substantially affect the free movement of personal data
5

 

within the Union. 42

The assessment shall contain at least a general description of the envisaged

processing operations, an evaluation of the risk referred to in paragraph 1. the

 

measures envisaged to address the risk including safeguards, security measures and
mechanisms to ensure the protection of personal data and to demonstrate compliance
with this Regulation taking into account the rights and legitimate interests of data

. 426
subjects and other persons concerned .

Compliance with approved codes of conduct referred to in Article 38 by the relevant
controllers or processors shall be taken into due account in assessing lawfulness and
impact of the processing operations performed by such controllers or processors. in

particular for the purposes of a data protection impact assessment427.

 

The controller shall seek the views of data subjects or their representatives on the

intended processing, without prejudice to the protection of commercial or public

interests or the security of the processing operations (. . .)428.

 

425
426
427
428

CZ reservation.

FR scrutiny reservation.

HU thought this should be moved to a recital.

CZ and FR indicated that this was a completely impractical obligation; IE reservation.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 166
DGD2C EN

LII

(. . .) Where the processing pursuant to point (c) or (e) of Article 6(1) has a legal basis
a Union law or the law of the Member State to which the controller is subject. ad
such law regulates the speciﬁc processing operation or set of operations in

guestion429, paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not apply, unless Member States deem it

 

necessary to carry out such assessment prior to the processing activities.

(. . .)
(. . .)
Article 34
Prior (. . .) consultation430
(. . .)

The controller (. . .)431

shall consult the supervisory authority prior to the processing
of personal data where a data protection impact assessment as provided for in Article
33 indicates that th_e processing would result in a high (. . .) risk in the absence of

measures to be taken by the controller to mitigate the risk..

 

429

430

431

BE and SI stated that this will have to be revisited in the context of the future debate on how
to include the public sector in the scope of the Regulation.

HU scrutiny reservation; SK reservation on giving this role to DPAs, which may not be able
to deal with these consultations in all cases. ES proposed to exempt controllers from the

obligation of a prior consultation in case they had appointed a DPO.
COM reservation on deleting processor.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 167
DGD2C EN

3.

6.

Where the supervisory authority is of the opinion that the intended processing referred
to in paragraph 2 auld not comply with this Regulation, in particular where th_e
controller has insufﬁciently identiﬁed or mitigated the risk, it shall within a maximum
period of 6 weeks following the request for consultation give advice to the data
controller. in writing and may use any of its powers referred to in432 Article 53 (. . .).
This period may be extended for a further six weeks. taking into account the complexity
of the intended processing. Where the extended period applies. the controller or

processor shall be informed within one month of receipt of the request of the reasons for

the delay.
(. . .)
(. . .)

When consulting the supervisory authority pursuant to paragraph 2. the controller (. . .)

shall provide the supervisory authority, with

(a) where applicable. the respective responsibilities of controller. joint controllers and

processors involved in the processing. in particular for processing within a group

of undertakings;

(b) the purposes and means of the intended processing'

(c) the measures and safeguards provided to protect the rights and freedoms of data

subjects pursuant to this Regulation;
(d) where applicable . the contact details of the data protection ofﬁcer:
(e) the data protection impact assessment as provided for in Article 33; and

(f) any (. . .) other information requested by the supervisory authority (. . .).

 

432

UK reservation; it thought the power to prohibit processing operations should not apply
during periods in which there is an overriding public interest for the processing to take place
(such as a public health emergency). The Presidency thinks this issue should however be
debated in the context of Chapter VI on the powers of the DPA, as these may obviously also
be used regardless of any consultation.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 168
DGD2C EN

7. Member States shall consult the supervisory authority during the preparation of a
proposal for a legislative measure adopted by a national parliament or of a regulatory

measure based on such a legislative measure which provide for the processing of

personal data (. . .)433.

h Notwithstanding paragraph 2. Member States' law may require controllers to consult
with. and obtain prior authorisation from. the supervisory authority in relation to the
processing of personal data by a controller for the performance of a task carried out
by the controller in the public interest. including the processing of such data in

relation to social protection and public health434.

 

 

433

IE scrutiny reservation on deletion.
434

SE scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 169
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 4
DATA PROTECTION OFFICER

Article 35
Designation of the data protection officer

The controller g the processor may. or where required by Union or Member State law

shall,435 designate a data protection ofﬁcer (. . .).
A group of undertakings may appoint a single data protection ofﬁcer.

Where the controller or the processor is a public authority or body, a single data

protection ofﬁcer may be designated for several such authorities or bodies. taking

 

account of their organisational structure and size.

(...).

The (. . .) data protection ofﬁcer shall be designated on the basis of professional qualities
and, in particular, expert knowledge of data protection law and practices and ability to

fulﬁl the tasks referred to in Article 37. particularly the absence of any conﬂict of

 

interests. (. . .).

(...)

(. . .). During their term of ofﬁce, the data protection ofﬁcer may, apart from serious
grounds under the law of the Member State concerned which justify the dismissal of an

employee or civil servant. be dismissed only if the data protection ofﬁcer no longer

 

fulﬁls the conditions required for the performance of his or her tasks pursuant to

Article 37.

 

 

435

Made optional further to decision by the Council. AT scrutiny reservation. DE, HU and AT
would have preferred to deﬁne cases of a mandatory appointment of DPA in the Regulation
itself and may want to revert to this issue at a later stage. COM reservation on optional
nature and deletion of points a) to c).

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 170
DGD2C EN

8. The data protection ofﬁcer may be a staff member of the controller or processor, or

fulﬁl th_e tasks on the basis of a service contract,

9. The controller or the processor shall publish the contact details of the data protection

ofﬁcer and communicate these to the supervisory authority (. . .).

10. Data subjects may contact the data protection ofﬁcer on all issues related to the

processing of the data subject’s data and the exercise of their rights under this

Regulation.
1 1. (. . .)
Article 36
Position of the data protection oﬁcer
1. The controller or the processor shall ensure that the data protection ofﬁcer is properly

and in a timely manner involved in all issues which relate to the protection of personal

data.

2. The controller or the processor shall support the data protection ofﬁcer in performing
the tasks referred to in Article 37 by providi_ng (. . .) resources necessary to carry out

these tasks as well as access to personal data and processing operations.

3. The controller or processor shall ensure that the data protection ofﬁcer a act in an
independent manner with respect to the performance of his or her tasks and does not

receive any instructions regarding the exercise of these tasks. He or she shall not be

 

penalised by the controller or the processor for performing his tasks. The data protection

ofﬁcer shall directly report to the highest management level of the controller or the

 

processor.

4. The data protection ofﬁcer may fulﬁl other tasks and duties. The controller or processor

shall ensure that any such tasks and duties do not result in a conﬂict of interests.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 171
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 3 7
Tasks of the data protection officer

1. The (. . .) data protection ofﬁcer (. . .) shall have the following tasks:

(a)

to inform and advise the controller or the processor and the employees who are

 

processing personal data of their obligations pursuant to this Regulation and

other Union or Member State data protection provisions (. . .);

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) to monitor compliance with this Regulation. with other Union or Member State
data protection provisions and with the policies of the controller or processor in
relation to the protection of personal data, including the assignment of
responsibilities, awareness-raising and training of staff involved in the
processing operations, and the related audits;

(C) (- - -)

(d) (- - -)

(C) (- - -)

(f) to provide advice where requested as regards the data protection impact
assessment and monitor its performance pursuant to Article 33;

(g) to monitor responses to requests from the supervisory authority and, within the
sphere of the data protection ofﬁcer's competence, aco-operate with the
supervisory authority at the latter's request or on the data protection ofﬁcer’s
own initiative;

(h) to act as the contact point for the supervisory authority on issues related to the
processing of personal data. including the prior consultation referred to in
Article 34. and consult. as appropriate. on any other matter.

2. (. . .)
a The data protection ofﬁcer shall in the performance his or her tasks have due regard to

 

the risk associated with the processing operations. taking into account the nature, scope,

 

context and purposes of the processing.

 

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 172
DGD2C EN

SECTION 5
CODES OF CONDUCT AND CERTIFICATION

Article 38

Codes of conduct 436

1. The Member States, the supervisory authorities, the European Data Protection Board
and the Commission shall encourage the drawing up of codes of conduct intended to
contribute to the proper application of this Regulation, taking account of the speciﬁc
features of the various data processing sectors and the speciﬁc needs of micro. small

and medium-sized enterprises.

1a Associations and other bodies representing categories of controllers or processors may
prepare codes of conduct. or amend or extend such codes. for the purpose of specifying

the application of provisions of this Regulation. such as:
(a) fair and transparent data processing;
(aa) the legitimate interests pursued by controllers in Speciﬁc contexts;
(b) the collection of data;
(bb) the pseudonymisation of personal data:
(c) the information of the public and of data subjects;
((1) the exercise of th_e rights of data subjects;

(e) information and protection of children and the way to collect the parent’s and

guardian’s consent;

(ee) measures and procedures referred to in Articles 22 and 23 and measures to

ensure security of processing referred to in Article 30;

 

43" AT, FI, SK and PL scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 173
ANNEX DGD2C EN

jet) notiﬁcation of personal data breaches to supervisory authorities and

communication of such breaches to data subjects;

 

(f) (...).

lab. In addition to adherence by controller or processor subject to the regulation. codes of
conduct approved pursuant to paragraph 2 may also be adhered to by controllers or
processors that are not subject to this Regulation according to Article 3 in order to provide
appropriate safeguards within the framework of personal data transfers to third countries or
international organisations under the terms referred to in Article 42( 2)( d). Such controllers
or processors shall make binding and enforceable commitments. via contractual

instruments or otherwise. to apply those appropriate safeguards including as regards data

subjects’ rights.

1b. Such a code of conduct shall contain mechanisms which enable the body referred to in
paragraph 1 of article 38a to carry out the mandatory437 monitoring of compliance with its
provisions by the controllers or processors which undertake to apply it. without prejudice
to the tasks and powers of the supervisory authority which is competent pursuant to Article

51 or 51a.

 

2. Associations and other bodies referred to in paragraph 1a which intend to m a code of
conduct, or to amend or extend an existing code, M submit the draft code to the
supervisory authority which is competent pursuant to Article 51. The supervisory authority
shall give an opinion on whether the draft code. or amended or extended code. is in
compliance with this Regulation and shall approve such draft. amended or extended code if

it ﬁnds that it provides sufﬁcient appropriate safeguards.

2a. Where the opinion referred to in paragraph 2 conﬁrms that the code of conduct. or
amended or extended code. is in compliance with this Regulation and the code is approved.
and if the code of conduct does not relate to processing activities in several Member States.

the supervisory authority shall register the code and publish the details thereof.

 

437 CZ preferred this monitoring to be optional.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 174
ANNEX DGD2C EN

lb.)

Where the draft code of conduct relates to processing activities in several Member States.
the supervisory authority competent pursuant to Article 51 shall. before approval. submit it
in the procedure referred to in Article 57 to the European Data Protection Board which
shall give an opinion on whether the draft code. or amended or extended code. is in
compliance with this Regulation or. in the situation referred to in paragraph lab. provides

appropriate safeguards438.

Where the opinion referred to in paragraph 2b conﬁrms that the code of conduct. or
amended or extended code. is in compliance with this Regulation. or. in the situation
referred to in paragraph lab. provides appropriate safeguards .the European Data

Protection Board shall submit its opinion to the Commission.

The Commission may adopt implementing acts for deciding that the approved codes of
conduct and amendments or extensions to existing approved codes of conduct submitted to
it pursuant to paragraph 3 have general validity within the Union. Those implementing acts

Shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure set out in Article 87(2).

The Commission shall ensure appropriate publicity for the approved codes which have

been decided as having general validity in accordance with paragraph 4.

The European Data Protection Board shall collect all approved codes of conduct and
amendments thereto in a register and shall make them publicly available through any

appropriate means. such as through the European E-Justice Portal.

 

438

FR made a proposal for a paragraph 2c: 'Approved codes of conduct pursuant to paragraph
2a shall constitute an element of the contractual relationship between the controller and the
data subject. When such codes of conduct determine the compliance of the controller or
processor with this Regulation, they shall be legally binding and enforceable.'

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 175
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 38a

Monitoring of approved codes of conductﬂ

Without prejudice to the tasks and powers of the competent supervisory authority under
Articles 52 and 53. the monitoring of compliance with a code of conduct pursuant to Article

440

38 (1b). may be carried out by a body which has an appropriate level of expertise in

relation to the subject-matter of the code and is accredited for this purpose by the competent

supervisoty authority.

A body referred to in paragraph 1 may be accredited for this purpose if:

(a) it has demonstrated its independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter

of the code to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority:

(b) it has established procedures which allow it to assess the eligibility of controllers
and processors concerned to apply the code. to monitor their compliance with its

provisions and to periodically review its operation:

(c) it has established procedures and structures to deal with complaints about
infringements of the code or the manner in which the code has been. or is being.
implemented by a controller or processor. and to make these procedures and

structures transparent to data subjects and the public:

(d) it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority that its

tasks and duties do not result in a conﬂict of interests.

 

439
440

AT scrutiny reservation.

CZ and ES are opposed to giving this role to such separate bodies. Concerns were raised,
inter alia, on the administrative burden involved in the setting up of such bodies. Codes of
conduct are an entirely voluntary mechanism in which no controller is obliged to participate.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 176
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. The competent supervisory authority shall submit the draft criteria for accreditation of a

 

body referred to in paragraph 1 to the European Data Protection Board pursuant to the

consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57.

 

4. Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter VIII. a body referred to in paragraph 1 may.
subject to adequate safeguards. take appropriate action in cases of infringement of the code
by a controller or processor. including suspension or exclusion of the controller or processor

concerned from the code. It shall inform the competent supervisory authority of such actions

 

and the reasons for taking them.

5. The competent supervisory authority shall revoke the accreditation of a body referred to in
paragraph 1 if the conditions for accreditation are not. or no longer. met or actions taken by

the body are not in compliance with this Regulation.

6. This article shall not apply to the processing of personal data carried out by public

authorities and bodies.

Article 39
Certiﬁcation441

1. T_he Member States, the European Data Protection Board and the Commission shall

 

encourage, in particular at Union level, the establishment of data protection certiﬁcation

mechanisms and of data protection seals and marks for the purpose of demonstrating

 

compliance with this Regulation of processing operations carried out by controllers and

 

processors. The speciﬁc needs of micro. small and medium-sized enterprises shall be taken

 

into account.

 

44' AT, FR, FI scrutiny reservation. FR thought the terminology used was unclear an that the

DPA should be in a position to check compliance with certiﬁed data protection policies; this
should be clariﬁed in Article 53.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 177
ANNEX DGD2C EN

LN

I.“

I.-h

In addition to adherence by controllers or processors subject to this Regulation. data

 

protection certiﬁcation mechanisms. seals or marks approved pursuant to paragraph 2a may

 

also be established for the purpose of demonstrating the existence of appropriate safeguards

 

provided by controllers or processors that are not subject to this Regulation according to

 

Article 3 within the framework of personal data transfers to third countries or international

 

organisations under the terms referred to in Article 42( 2)( e). Such controllers or processors

 

shall make binding and enforceable commitments. via contractual instruments or otherwise. to

 

apply those appropriate safeguards. including as regards data subjects’ rights

 

A certiﬁcation pursuant to this Article does not reduce the responsibility of the controller or

 

the processor for compliance with this Regulation and is without prejudice to the tasks and

 

powers of the supervisory authority which is competent pursuant to Article 51 or 51a.

 

A certiﬁcation pursuant to this Article shall be issued by the certiﬁcation bodies referred to in

 

Article 39a, or where applicable, by the competent supervisory authority on the basis of the

 

criteria approved by the competent supervisory authority or. pursuant to Article 5 7. the

 

European Data Protection Board442.

 

The controller or processor which submits its processing to the certiﬁcation mechanism shall

 

provide the certiﬁcation body referred to in Article 39a. or where applicable, the competent

 

 

supervisory authority, with all information and access to its processing activities which are

 

necessary to conduct the certiﬁcation procedure.

 

The certiﬁcation shall be issued to a controller or processor for a maximum period of 3 years

 

and may be renewed under the same conditions as long as the relevant requirements continue

 

to be met. It shall be withdrawn by the certiﬁcation bodies referred to in Article 39a. or where

 

applicable. by the competent supervisory authority where the requirements for the

 

certiﬁcation are not or no longer met.

 

 

This is without prejudice to the future discussion on the exact powers of the EDPB. This
discussion will take place in the context of the discussion on the one-stop-shop mechanism.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 178
ANNEX DGD2C EN

IF"

I“

LN

The European Data Protection Board shall collect all certiﬁcation mechanisms and data
protection seals in a register and shall make them publicly available through any appropriate

means. such as through the European E-Justice Portal.

Article 39a

Certiﬁcation body and procedureﬂ

Without prejudice to the tasks and powers of the competent supervisory authority under
Articles 52 and 53. the certiﬁcation shall be issued and renewed by a certiﬁcation body which
has an appropriate level of expertise in relation to data protection. Each Member State shall

provide whether these certiﬁcation bodies are accredited by:
(a) the supervisory authority which is competent according to Article 51 or 51a: and/or

(b) the National Accreditation Body named in accordance with Regulation 03C)
765/2008 of the European parliament and the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the
requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of
products in compliance with EN-ISO/IEC 17065/2012 and with the additional
requirements established by the supervisory authority which is competent according

to Article 51 or 51a.
The certiﬁcation body referred to in paragraph 1 may be accredited for this purpose only if:

(a) it has demonstrated its independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter of

the certiﬁcation to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority:

(aa) it has undertaken to respect the criteria referred to in paragraph 2a of Article 39
and approved by the supervisory authority which is competent according to Article

51 or 51a or . pursuant to Article 57. the European Data Protection Board:

 

AT and FR scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 179
ANNEX DGD2C EN

I.“

l.-h

IF"

(1;) it has established procedures for the issue. periodic review and withdrawal of data

 

protection seals and marks:

 

(p) it has established procedures and structures to deal with complaints about

 

infringements of the certiﬁcation or the manner in which the certiﬁcation has been.

 

or is being. implemented by the controller or processor. and to make these

 

procedures and structures transparent to data subjects and the public:

 

(p) it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority that its

 

tasks and duties do not result in a conﬂict of interests.

 

The accreditation of the certiﬁcation bodies referred to in paragraph 1 shall take place on the

 

basis of criteria approved by the supervisory authority which is competent according to

 

Article 51 or 51a or. pursuant to Article 5 7. the European Data Protection Board444. In case of

 

an accreditation pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 1, these requirements complement those

 

envisaged in Regulation 7 65/2008 and the technical rules that describe the methods and

 

procedures of the certiﬁcation bodies.

 

The certiﬁcation body referred to in paragraph 1 shall be responsible for the proper

 

assessment leading to the certiﬁcation or the withdrawal of such certiﬁcation without

 

prejudice to the responsibility of the controller or processor for compliance with this

 

Regulation. The accreditation is issued for a maximum period of ﬁve years and can be

 

renewed in the same conditions as long as the body meets the requirements.

 

The certiﬁcation body referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide the competent supervisory

 

authority with the reasons for granting or withdrawing the requested certiﬁcation.

 

 

444

This is without prejudice to the future discussion on the exact powers of the EDPB. This
discussion will take place in the context of the discussion on the one-stop-shop mechanism.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 180
ANNEX DGD2C EN

I?)

The requirements referred to in paragraph 3 and the criteria referred to in paragraph 2a of

Article 39 shall be made public by the supervisory authority in an easily accessible form. The

 

supervisory authorities shall also transmit these to the European Data Protection Board. The
European Data Protection Board shall collect all certiﬁcation mechanisms and data protection
seals in a register and shall make them publicly available through any appropriate means. such

as through the European E-Justice Portal.

Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter VIII. the competent supervisory authority or
the National Accreditation Body shall revoke the accreditation it granted to a certiﬁcation
body referred to in paragraph 1 if the conditions for accreditation are not. or no longer. met or

actions taken by the body are not in compliance with this Regulation445.

The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 86,
for the purpose of (. . .) specifying the criteria and requirements to be taken into account for

the data protection certiﬁcation mechanisms referred to in paragraph 1 (. . .).

The European Data Protection Board shall give an opinion to the Commission on the criteria

and requirements referred to in paragraph 7M_

The Commission may lay down technical standards for certiﬁcation mechanisms and data
protection seals and marks and mechanisms to promote and recognize certiﬁcation
mechanisms and data protection seals and marks. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in

accordance with the examination procedure set out in Article 87(2)447.

 

445

446

447

CZ, FR and HU though the national accreditation body should always consult the DPA
before accrediting a certiﬁcation body.

This is without prejudice to the future discussion on the exact powers of the EDPB. This
discussion will take place in the context of the discussion on the one-stop-shop mechanism.
PL reservation suggesting to delete this paragraph.

DE pleaded in favour of deleting the last two paragraphs and suggested adding a new
paragraph: "The previous paragraphs shall not affect provisions governing the responsibility
of national certiﬁcation bodies, the accreditation procedures and the speciﬁcation of criteria
for security and data protection. Commission’s power to adopt acts pursuant to paragraphs 7
and 8 shall not apply to national and international certiﬁcation procedures carried out on this
basis. Security certiﬁcates issued by the responsible bodies or bodies accredited by them in
the framework of these procedures shall be mutually recognized." ES also thought that this
should not be left exclusively to the Commission.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 181
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER V

TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES OR

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS448 449 45° 451

Article 40

General principle for transfers

(...)

 

448

449

450

451

In light of the fact that the public interest exception would in many cases be the main ground
warranting an international transfer of personal data, some delegations (CZ, DE, LV, UK)
queried whether the 'old' adequacy principle/test should still maintained and set out in such
detail, as it would in practice not be applied in that many cases. DE in particular thought that
the manifold exceptions emptied the adequacy rule of its meaning. Whilst they did not
disagree with the goal of providing protection against transfer of personal data to third
countries, it doubted whether the adequacy principle was the right procedure therefore, in
view of the many practical and political difﬁculties (the latter especially regarding the risk
of a negative adequacy decision, cf. DE, FR, UK). The feasibility of maintaining an
adequacy-test was also questioned with reference to the massive ﬂows of personal data in in
the context of cloud computing: BG, DE, FR, IT, NL, SK and UK. FR and DE asked
whether a transfer of data in the context of cloud computing or the disclosure of personal
data on the internet constitutes an international transfer of data. DE also thought that the
Regulation should create a legal framework for 'Safe Harbor-like' arrangements under which
certain guarantees to which companies in a third country have subscribed on a voluntary
basis are monitored by the public authorities of that country. The applicability to the public
sector of the rules set out in this Chapter was questioned (EE), as well as the delimitation to
the scope of proposed Directive (FR). The impact of this Chapter on existing Member State
agreements was raised by several delegations (FR, PL).

NL and UK pointed out that under the 1995 Data Protection Directive the controller who
wants to transfer data is the ﬁrst one to assess whether this possible in under the applicable
(EU) law and they would like to maintain this basic principle, which appears to have
disappeared in the Commission proposal.

DE asked which law would apply to data transferred controllers established in third
countries that come within the ambit of Article 3(2); namely whether this would be EU law
in accordance with that provision.

AT has made a number of proposals regarding this chapter set out in 10198/ 14
DATAPROTECT 82 JAI 363 M1458 DRS 73 DAPIX 71 FREMP 103 COMIX 281
CODEC 1351.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 182
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 41

- - - 452
Transfers With an adequacy dec1s10n

1. A transfer of personal data to (...) a third country or an international organisation

 

may take place where the Commission453 has decided that the third country, or a
territory or one or more speciﬁed sector§ within that third country, or the
international organisation in question ensures an adequate level of protection. Such

transfer shall not require any speciﬁc authorisation.

2. When assessing the adequacy of the level of protection, the Commission shall, i_n

particular. take account of the following elements:

 

(a) the rule of law, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. relevant

 

legislation (. . .)454, both general and sectoral. data protection rules and

 

security measures, including rules for onward transfer of personal data to

 

another third country or international organisation. which are complied with

 

in that third country or international organisation, as well as the existence of

effective and enforceable data subject rights and effective administrative and

 

judicial redress for data subjects whose personal data are being transferred

(...)455-

 

 

452

453

454
455

Some delegations raised concerns on the time taken up by adequacy procedures and stressed
the need to speed up this process. COM stated that this should not be at the expense of the
quality of the process of adequacy.

CZ, DE and SI reservation on giving such power to the Commission. NL and UK indicated
that on this point the proposal seemed to indicate a shift from the 1995 Data Protection
Directive, which put the responsibility for assessing a third country's data protection
legislation in the ﬁrst place with the controller who wanted to transfer personal data. UK had
considerable doubts on the feasibility of the list in paragraph 2.

AT would have preferred including a reference to national security.

NL thought that Article 41 was based on fundamental rights and legislation whereas Safe
harbour is of a voluntary basis and that it was therefore useful to set out elements of Safe
Harbour in a separate Article. DE asked how Safe Harbour could be set out in Chapter V.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 183
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) the existence and effective functioning of one or more independent
supervisory authorities456 in the third country a to which an international
organisation is subject. with responsibility for ensuring and enforcing
compliance with the data protection rules including adequate sanctioning
powers for assisting and advising the data subjects in exercising their rights
and for co-operation with the supervisory authorities of the Union and of

Member States;

(c) the international commitments the third country or international organisation
concerned has entered into, or other (. . .) obligations arising from its
participation in multilateral or regional systems. in particular in relation to the

protection of personal data. m

 

2a. The European Data Protection Board shall give the Commission an opinion458 for the
assessment of the adequacy of the level of protection in a third country or

international organization. including for the assessment whether a third country or

 

the territory or the international organization or the speciﬁed sector no longer ensures

 

an adequate level of protection.

 

456

457

458

NL queried how strict this independence would need to be assessed. BE suggested adding a
reference to independent judicial authorities, FI suggested to refer to 'authorities' tout court.
DE suggested the following addition to point (c): "(c) the international commitments the
third country or international organisation concerned has entered into, or other (. . .)
obligations arising from its participation in multilateral or regional systems. in particular i_n
relation to the protection of personal data. International commitments must contain
guarantees to be given by the third country that ensure an appropriate level of protection in
particular when data are processed in one or several speciﬁc sectors. In particular, the
third country must ensure eﬂective data protection supervision by adequately involving
European data protection supervisory authorities, and the data subjects must be provided
with possibilities of eﬂective legal redress. The Presidency has added text to cover this
aspect in recital 81.

CZ would prefer stronger language on the COM obligation to request an opinion from the
EDPB.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 184
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. The Commission, after assessing the adequacy459 of the level of protection. may
decide that a third country, or a territory or one or more speciﬁed sector§ within that
third country, or an international organisation ensures an adequate level of protection

46". The implementing act shall specify its

within the meaning of paragraph 2. (. . .)
territorial and sectoral application and. where applicable. identify the (independent)
supervisory authority(ies) mentioned in point (b) of paragraph 2. The implementing
act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in

Article 87(2)‘"”.

3a. Decisions adopted by the Commission on the basis ofArticle 25 (6) (...) of Directive

95/46/EC shall remain in force until amended, replaced or repealed by a

Commission462 Decision adopted in accordance with paragraph 3 or $463.

 

459

460

461

462

463

CZ, R0 and SI reservation on giving such power to the Commission. DE thought that
stakeholders should be involved in this process. NL and UK indicated that on this point the
proposal seemed to indicate a shift from the 1995 Data Protection Directive, which put the
responsibility for assessing a third country's data protection legislation in the ﬁrst place with
the controller who wanted to transfer personal data.

CZ, DE, HR, IT, NL, PL, SK and Ro thought an important role should be given to the
EDPB in assessing these elements.COM has pointed out that there can be no additional step
in the Comitology procedure, in order to be in line with the Treaties and Regulation

1 82/201 1 .

DE queried the follow-up to such decisions and warned against the danger that third
countries beneﬁting from an adequacy decision might not continue to offer the same level of
data protection. COM indicated there was monitoring of third countries for which an
adequacy decision was taken.

Moved from paragraph 8. CZ and AT thought an absolute maximum time period should be
set (sunset clause), to which COM was opposed. NL, PT and SI thought this paragraph 3a
was superﬂuous or at least unclear. Also RO thought that, if maintained, it should be moved
to the end of the Regulation.

PL: scrutiny reservation.

DE and ES suggested to request the Board for an opinion. COM has pointed out that there
can be no additional step in the Comitology procedure, in order to be in line with the
Treaties and Regulation 182/2011. DE asked if a decision in paragraph 3a lasted forever. IE
considered paragraph 3a providing necessary ﬂexibility. CZ thought that new States should
not be disadvantaged compared to those having received an adequacy decision under
Directive 1995.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 185
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(...)

The Commission shall monitor the functioning of decisions adopted pursuant to
paragraph 3 and decisions adopted on the basis of Article 25( 6) or Article 26(4) of
Directive 95/46/ECﬂ

The Commission may decide that a third country, or a territory or a speciﬁed sector
within that third country, or an international organisation no longer ensures an
adequate level of protection within the meaning of paragraph 2 and may, where
necessary. repeal. amend or suspend such decision without retro-active effect. The
implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure
referred to in Article 87(2) or, in cases of extreme urgency (. . .), in accordance with

the procedure referred to in Article 87(3)“. (. . .)

The Commission shall enter into consultations with the third country or international

 

organisation with a view to remedying the situation giving rise to the Decision made

 

pursuant to paragraph 5.

 

A decision pursuant to paragraph 5 is without prejudice to transfers of personal data
to the third country, or th_e territory or speciﬁed sector within that third country, or

the international organisation in question pursuant to Articles 42 to 44466.(. . .)

The Commission shall publish in the Oﬁ‘icial Journal of the European Union a list of
those third countries, territories and speciﬁed sectors within a third country and

international organisations in respect of which decisions have been taken pursuant to

paragraphs 3, 3a and 5.

(...)

 

464
465

466

BE queried about the reference to the 1995 Directive. CZ perceives this as superﬂuous.
FR and UK suggested the EDPB give an opinion before COM decided to withdraw an
adequacy decision.

DE asked for the deletion of paragraph 6.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 186
DGD2C EN

Article 42

Transfers by way of appropriate safeguards 467

In the absence of a decision pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 41, a controller or processor
may transfer personal data to (. . .) a third country or an international organisation only if the
controller or processor has adduced appropriate safeguards, also covering onward transfers
(. . .).

The appropriate safeguards referred to in paragraph 1 m_ay be provided for (. . .), without

requiring any speciﬁc authorisation from a supervisory authority. by:

(0a) a legally binding and enforceable instrument between public authorities or

 

- 468
bodies—; or

(a) binding corporate rules referred to in Article 43; or

(b) standard data protection clauses adopted by the Commission (. . .) in

accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 87(2)469; or

(c) standard data protection clauses adopted by a supervisory authority 1....) and

adopted by the Commission pursuant to the examination procedure referred
to in Article 87(2 ).

(s) an approved code of conduct pursuant to Article 38 together with binding and

enforceable commitments of the controller or processor (. . .) in the third

 

country to apply the appropriate safeguards. including as regards data

subjects’ rights ,' or

 

467

468

469

UK expressed concerns regarding the length of authorisation procedures and the burdens
these would put on DPA resources. The use of these procedures regarding data ﬂows in the
context of cloud computing was also questioned.

HU has serious concerns; the proposed general clause (“a legally binding instrument”) is too
vague because the text does not deﬁne its content. Furthermore, the text does not provide for
previous examination by the DPA either. HU therefore suggests either deleting this point or
subjecting such instrument to the authorisation of the DPA, as it believes that there is a real
risk that transfers based on such a vague instrument might seriously undermine the rights of
the data subjects.

FR reservation on the possibility for COM to adopt such standard clauses.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 187
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(s) an approved certiﬁcation mechanism pursuant to Article 39 together with
binding and enforceable commitments of the controller or processor (. . .)a

the third country to apply the appropriate safeguards. including as regards

data subjects’ rights.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a Subject to the authorisation from the competent supervisory authority. the appropriate
safeguards referred to in paragraph 1 may also be provided for. in particular. by:
(a) contractual clauses between the controller or processor and the controller, processor
or the recipient of the data (. . .) in the third country or international organisation; or
(b) (- - -)
(C) (- - -)
(g) provisions to be inserted into administrative arrangements between public authorities
or bodies (. . .).
3. (. . .)
4. (. . .)
5. (. . .)
5a. The supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism in the cases referred to in
points (ca). (d). (e) and (f) ofArticle 57 (2).
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 188

ANNEX DGD2C EN

5b.

Authorisations by aMember State or supervisory authority on the basis of Article 26(2) of
Directive 95/46/EC shall remain valid until amended, replaced or repealed by that
supervisory authority470. Decisions adopted by the Commission on the basis ofArticle 26(4)
of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in force until amended, replaced or repealed by a

. . 471 - - - - 472
Commtsszon DeciSion adopted in accordance With paragraph 2 .

Article 43

. . 473
Binding corporate rules

The competent supervisory authority shall approve474 binding corporate rules in accordance

with the consistency mechanism set out in Article 57 provided that they:

(a) are legally binding and apply to, and are enforced by, every member concerned o_f
th_e group of undertakings or group of enterprises engaged in a joint economic
activi ;

(b) expressly confer enforceable rights on data subjects with regard to the processing of
their personal data;

(c) fulﬁl the requirements laid down in paragraph 2.

 

470

471

472

473

474

UK and ES disagreed with the principle of subjecting non-standardised contracts to prior
authorisation by DPAs. IT was thought that this was contrary to the principle of
accountability. DE emphasised the need of monitoring.

AT thought an absolute time period should be set.

PL: scrutiny reservation.

DE and ES have suggested to request the Board for an opinion. COM has pointed out that
there can be no additional step in the Comitology procedure, in order to be in line with the
Treaties and Regulation 182/2011.

NL thought it should be given a wider scope. BE and NL pointed to the need for a
transitional regime allowing to 'grandfather' existing BCRs. NL asked whether the BCRs
should also be binding upon employees. SI thought BCRs should also be possible with
regard to some public authorities, but COM stated that it failed to see any cases in the public
sector where BCRs could be applied. HU said that it thought that BCRs were used not only
by proﬁt-seeking companies but also by international bodies and NGOs.

DE and UK expressed concerns on the lengthiness and cost of such approval procedures.
The question was raised which DPAs should be involved in the approval of such BCRs in
the consistency mechanism.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 189
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2. The binding corporate rules referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify at least:

(a)
(h)

(C)
(d)

(f)

(g)

(h)

the structure and contact details of the concerned group and of each of its members;
the data transfers or categories of transfers, including the tyjm of personal data, the
type of processing and its purposes, the type of data subjects affected and the
identiﬁcation of the third country or countries in question;

their legally binding nature, both internally and externally;

application of the general data protection principles, in particular purpose
limitation, (. . .) data quality, legal basis for the processing, processing of 3%
categories of personal data, measures to ensure data security, and the requirements
in respect of onward transfers to bodies (. . .) not bound by the binding corporate
m;

the rights of data subjects in regard to the processing of their personal data and the
means to exercise these rights, including the right not to be subject to (. . .)decisions
based solely on automated processing. including proﬁling, in accordance with
Article 20, the right to lodge a complaint before the competent supervisory
authority and before the competent courts of the Member States in accordance with
Article 75, and to obtain redress and, where appropriate, compensation for a breach
of the binding corporate rules;

the acceptance by the controller or processor established on the territory of a
Member State of liability for any breaches of the binding corporate rules by any
member concerned not established in the Union; the controller or the processor may
only be exempted from this liability, in whole or in part, on proving that that
member is not responsible for the event giving rise to the damage475;

how the information on the binding corporate rules, in particular on the provisions
referred to in points (d), (e) and (f) of this paragraph is provided to the data subjects

in accordance with Articles 14 and 14a:

 

the tasks of ay data protection ofﬁcer designated in accordance with Article 35 g

any other person or entity in charge of monitoring (. . .) compliance with the binding

 

corporate rules within the group, as well as monitoring the training and complaint

handling;

 

475

DE thought that the reference to exemptions should be deleted here.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 190
DGD2C EN

(Q)

(i)

(k)

(1)

(m)

the complaint procedures:
the mechanisms within the group, for ensuring the veriﬁcation of compliance with

the binding corporate rules. Such mechanisms shall include data protection audits

 

and methods for ensuring corrective actions to protect the rights of the data subject.
Results of such veriﬁcation should be communicated to the person or entity referred
under point (h) and to the board of the controlling undertaking or of the group of
enterprises. and should be available upon request to the competent supervisory
authority;

the mechanisms for reporting and recording changes to the m and reporting these
changes to the supervisory authority;

the co-operation mechanism with the supervisory authority to ensure compliance by
any member of the group (. . .), in particular by making available to the supervisory
authority the results of (. . .) veriﬁcations of the measures referred to in point (i) of
this paragraph476;
the mechanisms for reporting to the competent supervisory authority any legal
requirements to which a member of the group is subject in a third country which are
likely to have a substantial adverse effect on the guarantees provided by the binding
corporate rulesﬂad

the appropriate data protection training to personnel having permanent or regular

access to personal data (...).

 

 

 

 

 

2a. The European Data Protection Board shall advise the Commission on the format and
procedures for the exchange of information between controllers. processors and supervisory
authorities for binding corporate rules.

476 BE suggested making this more explicit in case of a conﬂict between the 'local' legislation
applicable to a member of the group and the BCR.

477 CZ expressed concerns about the purpose of this provision and its application. UK found
this point very prescriptive and wanted BCRs to be ﬂexible to be able to be used for
different circumstances.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 191

ANNEX DGD2C EN

(. . -)478

The Commission may specify the format and procedures for the exchange of information
(. . .) between controllers, processors and supervisory authorities for binding corporate rules
within the meaning of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance

with the examination procedure set out in Article 87(2).479

Article 44

. . . . 480
Derogations for specific Situations

In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 41, a of

appropriate safeguards pursuant to Article 42, including binding corporate rules (...). a

 

transfer or a category of transfers of personal data to (. . .) a third country or an international
organisation may take place only on condition that:
(a) the data subject has explicitly481 consented to the proposed transfer, after having

been informed th_at such transfers may involve risks for the data subject due to the

 

absence of an adequacy decision and appropriate safeguards; or
(b) the transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract between the data subject
and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measures taken at the

data subject's request; or

 

478

479
480

481

NL, PL scrutiny reservation

SE reservation considering that implementing acts lack sufﬁcient ﬂexibility.

ES: scrutiny reservation

EE reservation. NL parliamentary reservation. CZ, EE and UK and other delegations that in
reality these 'derogations' would become the main basis for international data transfers and
this should be acknowledged as such by the text of the Regulation.

UK thought the question of the nature of the consent needed to be discussed in a horizontal
manner.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 192
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(C)

(d)
(C)
(0

(g)

the transfer is necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract concluded in
the interest of the data subject between the controller and another natural or legal
person; or

the transfer is necessary for important reasons of public interest482; or

the transfer is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; or
the transfer is necessary in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of
other persons, where the data subject is physically or legally incapable of giving
consent; or

the transfer is made from a register which according to Union or Member State law is
intended to provide information to the public and which is open to consultation either
by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate interest
but only to the extent that the conditions laid down in Union or Member State law for

consultation are fulﬁlled in the particular case; or

 

 

482 DE remarked that the effects of (d) in conjunction with paragraph 5 need to be examined, in
particular with respect to the transfer of data on the basis of court judgments and decisions
by administrative authorities of third states, and with regard to existing mutual legal
assistance treaties. IT reservation on the (subjective) use of the concept of public interest.
HR suggested adding 'which is not overridden by the legal interest of the data subject'.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 193

ANNEX DGD2C EN

(h) the transfer, which is not large scale or ﬁ'equent483, is necessary for the purposes of
legitimate interests pursued by the controller which are not overridden by the
interests or rights and freedoms of the data subject and where the controller (. . .)_has
assessed all the circumstances surrounding the data transfer operation or the set of
data transfer operations and (. . .) based on this assessment adduced suitable

safeguards484 with respect to the protection of personal data.

A transfer pursuant to point (g) of paragraph 1 shall not involve the entirety of the personal
data or entire categories of the personal data contained in the register. When the register is
intended for consultation by persons having a legitimate interest, the transfer shall be made

only at the request of those persons or if they are to be the recipients.

(...)

Points (a), (b), (c) and (h) of paragraph lshall not apply to activities carried out by public

authorities in the exercise of their public powers485.

 

483

484

485

AT, ES, HU, MT, PL, PT and SI would prefer to have this derogation deleted as they think
it is too wide; it was stated that data transfers based on the legitimate interest of the data
controller and directed into third countries that do not provide for an adequate level of
protection with regard to the right of the data subjects would entail a serious risk of lowering
the level of protection the EU acquis currently provides for.)

HU suggested as an alternative to deletion of point (h), that transfers based on Article
44(1)(h) must be subjected to a prior approval of the competent supervisory authority.

DE and ES scrutiny reservation on the terms 'frequent or massive'. DE, supported by S1,
proposed to narrow it by referring to 'overwhelming legitimate interest'. ES proposed to
replace it by 'are small-scale and occasional'; UK asked why it was needed to add another
qualiﬁer to the legitimate interest of the transfer and thought that such narrowing down of
this derogation was against the risk-based approach.

AT and NL reservation: it was unclear how this reference to appropriate safeguards relates
to appropriate safeguards in Article 42.

BE scrutiny reservation. FR has a reservation concerning the exception of public authorities.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 194
ANNEX DGD2C EN

6a.

The public interest referred to in point (d) of paragraph 1 must be recognised in Union law

or in the national law of the Member State to which the controller is subject. (...)

In the absence of an adequacy decision. Union law or Member State law may. for important
reasons of public interest. expressly set limits to the transfer of speciﬁc categories of

486

personal data to a third country or an international organisation . Member States shall

. . . . . 487
notify such prov1s10ns to the Commiss10n .

The controller or processor shall document the assessment as well as the suitable safeguards

 

(. . .) referred to in point (h) of paragraph 1 in the records referred to in Article 28 (. . .).

(...)

(...)

 

486

487

S1 and UK scrutiny reservation. FR and ES proposed that this provision should be included
in another provision.

Some delegations (FR, PL, SI) referred to the proposal made by DE (for new Article 42a:
12884/13 DATAPROTECT 117 JAI 689 M1 692 DRS 149 DAPIX 103 FREMP 116
COMIX 473 CODEC 186) and the amendment voted by the European Parliament (Article
43a), which will imply discussions at a later stage.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 195
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 45

International co-operation for the protection of personal data488

In relation to third countries and international organisations, the Commission and

supervisory authorities shall take appropriate steps to:

develop international co-operation mechanisms to facilitate the eﬂective enforcement
of legislation for the protection of personal data;

provide international mutual assistance in the enforcement of legislation for the
protection of personal data, including through (. . .) complaint referral, investigative
assistance and information exchange, subject to appropriate safeguards for the
protection of personal data and other fundamental rights and freedoms489;

engage relevant stakeholders in discussion and activities aimed at promoting
international co-operation in the enforcement of legislation for the protection of
personal data;

promote the exchange and documentation of personal data protection legislation and

practice.

 

PL thought (part of) Article 45 could be inserted into the preamble. NL, R0 and UK also
doubted the need for this article in relation to adequacy and thought that any other
international co-operation between DPAs should be dealt with in Chapter VI. NL thought
this article could be deleted. ES has made an alternative proposal, set out in 6723/6/13
REV 6 DATAPROTECT 20 JAI 130 M1 131 DRS 34 DAPIX 30 FREMP 15 COMIX 111
CODEC 394.

AT and F1 thought this subparagraph was unclear and required clariﬁcation.

 

CHS/VH/np 196
DGD2C EN

1a.

CHAPTER VI
INDEPENDENT SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES

SECTION 1
INDEPENDENT STATUS

Article 46

Supervisory authority

Each Member State shall provide that one or more independent public authorities are
responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation.

Each supervisory authority shall contribute to th_e consistent application of this Regulation
throughout the Union (. . .). For @ purpose, the supervisory authorities shall co-operate
with each other and the Commission in accordance with Chapter VII.

Where in a Member State more than one supervisory authority are established, that Member
State shall designate the supervisory authority which shall represent those authorities in the
European Data Protection Board and shall set out the mechanism to ensure compliance by
the other authorities with the rules relating to the consistency mechanism referred to in
Article 57.

Each Member State shall notify to the Commission those provisions of its law which it
adopts pursuant to this Chapter, by the date speciﬁed in Article 91(2) at the latest and,

without delay, any subsequent amendment affecting them490.

Article 47

Independence

Each supervisory authority shall act with complete independence in performing the duties491

and exercising th_e powers entrusted to it in accordance with this Regulation.

 

490
491

DE, FR and EE that thought that this paragraph could be moved to the ﬁnal provisions.
GR scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 197
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The member or members of each supervisory authority shall, in the performance of their

duties and exercise of their powers in accordance with this Regulation. remain free from

 

external inﬂuence. whether direct or indirect and neither seek nor take instructions from
492

 

anybody

(. . -)493

(. . -)494

Each Member State shall ensure that M supervisory authority is provided with the (. . .)
human, technical and ﬁnancial resources, premises and infrastructure necessary for the
effective performance of its m and exercise of its powers, including those to be carried
out in the context of mutual assistance, co-operation and participation in the European Data

Protection Board.

Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority has its own staff which shall

(. . .) be subject to the direction of the member or members of the supervisory authority.

Member States shall ensure that each supervisory authority is subject to ﬁnancial control495

which shall not affect its independence. Member States shall ensure that each supervisoty

 

authority has separate, public, annual budgets. which may be part of the overall state or
national budget.

 

492
493

494
495

IE reservation: IE thought the latter part of this paragraph was worded too strongly.

AT, BE, DE and HU would prefer to reinstate this text. CZ, EE and SE were satisﬁed with
the deletion.

COM and DE, AT reservation on deletion of paragraphs 3 and 4.

EE reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 198
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 48

General conditions for the members of the supervisory authority

Member States shall provide that the member or members of each supervisoty authority
must be appointed (. . .) by the parliament and/or the government or the head of State of the
Member State concerned or by an independent body entrusted by Member State law with the

appointment by means of a transparent procedure496.

 

The member or members shall have the qualiﬁcations, experience and skills required to

 

perform their duties and exercise their powers.

 

The duties of a member shall end in the event of the expiry of the term of ofﬁce, resignation

or compulsory retirement in accordance with the law of the Member State concerned497.

(...)

(...)498.

 

496

497

498

Several delegations (FR, SE, SI and UK) thought that other modes of appointment should
have been allowed for. FR (and R0) thought that a recital should clarify that "independent
body" also covers courts.

COM reservation and DE scrutiny reservation on the expression "in accordance with the law
of the Member States concerned". The question is whether this means that the Member
States are being granted the power to deﬁne the duties further or whether the wording
should be understood as meaning that only constitutional conditions or other legal
framework conditions (e. g. civil service law) should be taken into account. DE and HU also
suggest that rules in the event of death or invalidity be added (see, for example, Article
42(4) of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001) as well as referring to a procedure for the nomination
of a representative in case the member is prevented from performing his or her duties. CZ,
NO, SE see no need for paragraph 3

COM, DE and AT scrutiny reservation on deletion of paragraphs 4 and 5.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 199
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 49
Rules on the establishment of the supervisory authority

1. Each Member State shall provide by law for:

(a) the establishment (. . .) of M supervisory authority;

(b) the qualiﬁcations (. . .) required to perform the duties of the members of the supervisory
authority‘”;

(c) the rules and procedures for the appointment of the member or members of m supervisory
authority (. . .);

(d) the duration of the term of the member or members of m supervisory authority which
shall g be (. . .) less than four years, except for the ﬁrst appointment after entry into force
of this Regulation, part of which may take place for a shorter period where this is necessary
to protect the independence of the supervisory authority by means of a staggered
appointment procedure;

(e) whether and. if so. for how many terms the member or members of each supervisory

 

authority shall be eligible for reappointment;
(f) the (. . .) conditions governing the obligations of the member or members and staff of each

supervisory authority. prohibitions on actions and occupations incompatible therewith

 

during and after the term of ofﬁce and rules governing the cessation of employment;

(8) (050"-

 

 

2. The member or members and the staff of each supervisory authority shall in accordance

 

with Union or Member State law. be subject to a duty of professional secrecy both during

 

and aﬁer their term of oﬁice, with regard to any conﬁdential information which has come to

their knowledge in the course of the performance of their (. . .) duties or exercise of their

powers.

 

499

500 IE reservation: IE thought these qualiﬁcations need not be laid down in law.

CZ, DE scrutiny reservation on deletion of this point.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 200
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 50

 

Professional secrecy
(. . . )
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 201
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 2
COMPETENCE, TASKS AND POWERS

Article 51
Competence

Each supervisory authority shall be competent to perform the tasks and exercise the powers
conferred on it in accordance with this Regulation on the territory of its own Member State.
(. . .)

Where the processing is carried out by public authorities or private bodies acting on the
basis of points (c) or (e) of Article 6(1). the supervisory authority of the Member State
concerned shall be competent“. In such cases Article 51a does not apply.

Supervisory authorities shall not be competent to supervise processing operations of courts

acting in their judicial capacity502. (. . .).

Article 51a
Competence of the lead supervison authority

Without prejudice to Article 51. the supervisory authority of the main establishment or of

 

the single establishment of the controller or processor_shall be competent to act as lead
supervisory authority for the transnational processing of this controller or processor in

accordance with the procedure in Article 54a.

(...)

 

501

502

COM opposes the exclusion of private bodies from the one-stop mechanism, pointing to the
example of cross-border infrastructure provided by private bodies in the public interest. AT,
IE, FR and F1 preferred to refer to ' processing carried out by public authorities and bodies
of a Member State or by private bodies acting on the basis of a legal obligation to discharge
functions in the public interest'.

FR, HU, R0 and UK scrutiny reservation. DE suggested adding "other matters assigned to
courts for independent performance. The same shall apply insofar as judicially independent
processing has been ordered, approved or declared admissible", as the derogation must
apply whenever courts' work falls within the scope of their institutional independence,
which is not only the case in the core area of judicial activity but also in areas where courts
are assigned tasks speciﬁcally for independent performance.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 202
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2a. By derogation from paragraph 1. each supervisory authority shall be competent to deal with
a complaint lodged with it or to deal with a possible infringement of this Regulation. if the
subject matter relates only to an establishment in its Member State or substantially affects

data subjects only in its Member State.

2b. In the cases referred to in paragraph 2a. the supervisory authority shall inform the lead
supervisory authority without delay on this matter. Within a period of three weeks after
being informed the lead supervisory authority shall decide whether or not it will deal with
the case in accordance with the procedure provided in Article 54a. taking into account
whether or not there is an establishment of the controller or processor in the Member State

of which the supervisory authority informed it.

Q Where the lead supervisory authority decides to deal with the case. the procedure provided
in Article 54a shall apply. The supervisory authority which informed the lead supervisory
authority may submit to such supervisory authority a draft for a decision. The lead
supervisory authority shall take utmost account of that draft when preparing the draft

decision referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 54a.

2d. In case the lead supervisory authority decides not to deal with it. the supervisory authority
which informed the lead supervisory authority shall deal with the case according to Articles

55 and 56.

3. The lead supervisory authority shall be the sole interlocutor of the controller or processor_for

their transnational processing.

 

 

4 (. . .)
Article 51b
Identiﬁcation of the supervisory authority competent for the main establishment
(. . .)
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 203

ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 51c
One-stop shop register

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

( )503
Article 52
Tasks 504

1. Without prejudice to other tasks set out under this Regulation. each supervisory authority
shall on its territoty:

(a) monitor and enforce the application of this Regulation;

(aa) promote public awareness and understanding of the risks, rules, safeguards and rights in
relation to the processing of personal data. Activities addressed speciﬁcally to children shall
receive speciﬁc attention;

(ab) advise. in accordance with national law. the national parliament, the government, and other
institutions and bodies on legislative and administrative measures relating to the protection
of individuals’ rights and freedoms with regard to the processing of personal data;

(ac) promote the awareness of controllers and processors of their obligations under this
Regulation;

(ad) upon request, provide information to any data subject concerning the exercise of their rights
under this Regulation and, if appropriate, co-operate with the supervisory authorities in other
Member States to this end;

503 AT reservation on the deletion of Articles 51b and 51c.

50" DE, IT, AT, PT and SE scrutiny reservation.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 204

ANNEX DGD2C EN

(h)

deal with complaints lodged by a data subject, or body, organisation or association

representing a data subject in accordance with Article 73, ad investigate, to the extent
appropriate, the ﬂue—ct matter of the complaint and inform the data subject or the ﬂy,
organisation or association of the progress and the outcome of the investigation within a
reasonable period , in particular if further investigation or coordination with another

supervisory authority is necessary;

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) cooperate with, including sharing information. and provide mutual assistance to other
supervisory authorities with a view to ensun'_ng the consistency of application and
enforcement of this Regulation;

(d) conduct investigations on the application of this Regulation. including on the basis of a
information received from another supervisory or other public authority:

(e) monitor relevant developments, insofar as they have an impact on the protection of personal
data, in particular the development of information and communication technologies and
commercial practices;

(f) adopt standard contractual clauses referred to in Article 26( 2c);

(fa) establish and make a list in relation to the requirement for data protection impact assessment
pursuant to Article 33(2a);

(g) give advice on the processing operations referred to in Article 34(3);

(ga) encourage the drawing up of codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38 and give an opinion
and approve such codes of conduct which provide sufﬁcient safeguards. pursuant to Article
M

(gb) promote the establishment of data protection certiﬁcation mechanisms and of data protection
seals and marks. and approve the criteria of certiﬁcation pursuant to Article 39 (2a);

(gc) where applicable. carry out a periodic review of certiﬁcations issued in accordance with
Article 39(4);

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 205

ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(h) draft and publish the criteria for accreditation of a body for monitoring codes of conduct
pursuant to Article 38a and of a certiﬁcation body pursuant to Article 39a:

(ha) conduct the accreditation of a body for monitoring codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38a
and of a certiﬁcation body pursuant to Article 39a;

(hb) authorise contractual clauses referred to in Article 42( 2a)( a);

(i) approve binding corporate rules pursuant to Article 43;

(j) contribute to the activities of the European Data Protection Board;

(k) fulﬁl any other tasks related to the protection of personal data.

2. (. . .)

3. (. . .).

4. Each supervisory authority shall facilitate the submission of complaints referred to in point
(b) of paragraph 1. by measures such as providing a complaint submission form which can
be completed also electronically, without excluding other means of communication.

5. The performance of the tasks of each supervisory authority shall be free of charge for the
data subject and for the data protection ofﬁcer. if any.

6. Where requests are manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular because of their
repetitive character, the supervisory authority may refuse to act on the request. The
supervisory authority shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestly unfounded or
excessive character of the request505.

505 DE and SE reservation: this could be left to general rules.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 206

ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 53

506
Powers

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Each Member State shall provide by law that its supervisory authority shall have at leastm
the following investigative powers:

(a) to order the controller and the processor, and, where applicable, the controller’s
representative to provide any information it requires for the performance of its tasks;

(aa) to carry out investigations in the form of data protection audits508;

(a) to carry out a review on certiﬁcations issued pursuant to Article 39(4);

(h) (- - -)

(C) (- - -)

(d) to notify the controller or the processor of an alleged infringement of this Regulation;

(E) to obtain, from the controller and the processor, access to all personal data and to all
information necessary for the performance of its tasks;

(Q) to obtain access to any premises of the controller and the processor, including to any data
processing equipment and means, in conformity with Union law or Member State
procedural law.

5"" DE, Ro, PT and SE scrutiny reservation; SE thought this list was too broad. Some Member
States were uncertain (CZ, R0 and UK) or opposed (DE and IE) to categorising the DPA
powers according to their nature.

507 R0 argued in favour of the inclusion of an explicit reference to the power of DPAs to issue
administrative orders regarding the uniform application of certain data protection rules.
COM and ES scrutiny reservation on 'at least' in paragraphs 1 and 1a.

508 CZ, IT, PL scrutiny reservation. CZ and PL pleaded for a recital explaining that audit could
be understood as inspection.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 207

ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1a. (. . .).

1b. Each Member State shall provide by law that its supervisory authority shall have the
following corrective powers:

(a) to issue warnings to a controller or processor that intended processing operations are likely
to infringe provisions of this Regulation;

(b) to issue reprimands509 to a controller or processor where processing operations have
infringed provisions of this Regulationﬂ;

(C) (- - -);

(ca) to order the controller or the processor to comply with the data subject's requests to exercise
his or her rights pursuant to this Regulation;

(d) to order the controller or processor to bring processing operations into compliance with the
provisions of this Regulation. where appropriate. in a speciﬁed manner and within a
speciﬁed period; in particular by ordering the rectiﬁcation, restriction or erasure of data
pursuant to Articles 16. 17 and 17a and the notiﬁcation of such actions to recipients to
whom the data have been disclosed pursuant to Articles 17( 2a) and 17b;

(e) to impose a temporary or deﬁnitive limitation on processing (. . .);

(f) to order the suspension of data ﬂows to a recipient in a third country or to an international
organisation;

(g) to impose an administrative ﬁne pursuant to Articles 79 and 79a511. in addition to. or instead
of measures referred to in this paragraph. depending on the circumstances of each individual
m.

509 PL scrutiny reservation.

51" PL scrutiny reservation on points (a) and (b).

5'1 DK constitutional reservation on the introduction of administrative ﬁnes, irrespective of the
level of the ﬁnes.

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 208

ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1c. Each Member State shall provide by law that its supervisory authority shall have the
following authorisation and advisory powers:

(a) to advise the controller in accordance with the prior consultation procedure referred to in
Article 34,

(aa) to issue. on its own initiative or on request. opinions to the national parliament. the Member
State government or. in accordance with national law. to other institutions and bodies as
well as to the public on any issue related to the protection of personal data;

(ab) to authorise processing referred to in Article 34( 7a). if the law of the Member State requires
such prior authorisation;

(ac) to issue an opinion and approve draft codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38(2);

(ad) to accredit certiﬁcation bodies under the terms of Article 39a;

(ac) to issue certiﬁcations and approve criteria of certiﬁcation in accordance with Article 39( 2a);
(b) to adopt standard data protection clauses referred to in point (c) of Article 42( 2);

(c) t_o authorise contractual clauses referred to in point (a) of Article 42 (2a);
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 209

ANNEX DGD2C EN

(ca) to authorise administrative agreements referred to in point (d) of Article 42 (2a);

(d) to approve binding corporate rules pursuant to Article 43.

2. The exercise of the powers conferred on the supervisory authority pursuant to this Article
shall be subject to appropriate safeguards, including effective judicial remedy and due
process, set out in Union and Member State law in accordance with the Charter of

Fundamental Rights of the European Union. ﬂ

 

3. Each Member State shall provide by law that its supervisory authority shall have the power
to bring infringements of this Regulation to the attention of the judicial authorities M(. . .),

. . . . 513 .
where appropriate. to commence or engage otherWise in legal proceedings , in order to

 

enforce the provisions of this Regulation“.

 

Article 54
Activity Report

Each supervisory authority shall draw up an annual report of its activities. The report shall be
transmitted to the national Parliament. the government and other authorities as designated by
national law. It shall be made available to the public. the European Commission and the European

Data Protection Board.

 

5'2 CY, ES, FR, IT and R0 thought this could be put in a recital as these obligations were

binding upon the Member States at any rate.

DE, FR and R0 reservation on proposed DPA power to engage in legal proceedings. UK
scrutiny reservation. CZ and HU reservation on the power to bring this to the attention of the
judicial authorities.

5'4 DE thought para. 3 should be deleted.

513

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 210
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER VII515
CO-OPERATION AND CONSISTENCY
SECTION 1

CO-OPERATION

 

Article 54a
Cooperation between the lead supervisory authority and other concerned supervisory
authorities 5'6
1. The lead supervisory authority (. . .) shall cooperate with the other concerned supervisory

authorities in accordance with this article in an endeavour to reach consensus (. . .). The lead
supervisory authority and the concerned supervisory authorities shall exchange all relevant

information with each other.

1a. The lead supervisory authority may request at any time other concerned supervisory
authorities to provide mutual assistance pursuant to Article 55 and may conduct joint operations
pursuant to Article 56. in particular for carrying out investigations or for monitoring the
implementation of a measure concerning a controller or processor established in another Member

State.

A The lead supervisory authority shall. without delay communicate the relevant information on
the matter to the other concerned supervisory authorities. It shall without delay submit a draft
decision to the other concerned supervisory authorities for their opinion and take due account of

their views.

 

5'5 AT and FR scrutiny reservation on Chapter VII.

5‘6 CZ, CY, DE, EE, FR, FI, IE, R0 and PT scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 211
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. Where any517 of the other concerned supervisory authorities within a period of four weeks

after having been consulted in accordance with paragraph 2, expresses a relevant and reasoned

 

 

objection to the draﬁ decision, the lead supervisoty authority shall. if it does not follow the

objection or is of the opinion it is not relevant and reasoned. submit the matter to the consistency

 

mechanism referred to in Article 57. (. . .)

Q Where the lead supervisory authority intends to follow the objection made. it shall submit to

 

the other concerned supervisory authorities a revised draft decision for their opinion. This revised

 

draft decision shall be subject to the procedure referred to in paragraph 3 within a period of two

 

weeks.

4. Where none of the other concerned supervisory authority has objected to the draft decision

 

submitted by the lead supervisory authority within the period referred to in paragraphs 3 and 3a. the

 

lead supervisory authority and the concerned supervisory authorities shall be deemed to be in

 

agreement with this draft decision and shall be bound by it.

 

E The lead supervisory authority shall adopt and notify the decision to the main establishment

 

or single establishment of the controller or processor. as the case may be and inform the other

 

concerned supervisory authorities and the European Data Protection Board of the decision in

 

question including a summary of the relevant facts and grounds. The supervisory authority to which

 

a complaint has been lodged shall inform the complainant on the decision.

 

41 By derogation from paragraph 4a. where a complaint is dismissed or rejected. the supervisory

 

authority to which the complaint was lodged shall adopt the decision and notify it to the

 

complainant and shall inform the controller thereof.

 

 

5'7 A number of Member States (CZ, IE, NL, PL, FI and UK) still prefers a quantitative
threshold by which an objection would need to be supported by 1/3 of the concerned
supervisory authorities before the lead authority is obliged to refer the matter to the EDPB.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 212
ANNEX DGD2C EN

4bb. Where the lead supervisory authority and the concerned supervisory authorities are in
agreement to dismiss or reject parts of a complaint and to act on other parts of that complaint. a
separate decision shall be adopted for each of those parts of the matter.The lead supervisory
authority shall adopt the decision for the part concerning actions in relation to the controller and
notify it to the main establishment or single establishment of the controller or processor on the
territory of its Member State and shall inform the complainant thereof518. while the supervisory
authority of the complainant shall adopt the decision for the part concerning dismissal or rejection
of that complaint and notify it on that complainant519 and shall inform the controller or processor

thereof. E

49. After being notiﬁed of the decision of the lead supervisory authority pursuant to paragraph 4a
and 4bb. the controller or processor shall take the necessary measures to ensure compliance with the
decision as regards the processing activities in the context of all its establishments in the Union. The
controller or processor shall notify the measures taken for complying with the decision to the lead

supervisory authority. which shall inform the other concerned supervisory authorities.

4g. Where. in exceptional circumstances. a concerned supervisory authority has reasons to
consider that there is an urgent need to act in order to protect the interests of data subjects. the

urgency procedure referred to in Article 61 shall apply.

5. The lead supervisory authority and the other concerned supervisory authorities shall supply
the information required under this Article (. . .) to each other by electronic means, using a

standardised format.

 

518
519

Further to suggestions from HU and IE.

SI scrutiny reservation. PL reservation on paras 4b and 4bb: PL and F1 thought para. 4bb
should be deleted as it was opposed to the concept of a split decision. IT thought para 4bb
overlapped with para 4b.

52" Further to suggestions from HU and IE.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 213
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 54b

Cooperation between the lead supervisory authority and the other supervisory authorities

concerned in individual cases of possible non-compliance with the Regulation

(...)

Article 55

- 521
Mutual ass1stance

1. Supervisory authorities shall provide each other m relevant information and mutual
assistance in order to implement and apply this Regulation in a consistent manner, and shall put in
place measures for effective co-operation with one another. Mutual assistance shall cover, in
particular, information requests and supervisory measures, such as requests to carry out prior

authorisations and consultations, inspections and investigations. (...)

2. Each supervisory authority shall take all appropriate measures required to reply to the request
of another supervisory authority without undue delay and no later than one month522 after having
received the request. Such measures may include, in particular, the transmission of relevant

information on the conduct of an investigation (. . .).

 

52' DE, SE and UK scrutiny reservation.

522 ES, supported by PT, had suggested 15 days. R0 and SE found one month too short. COM
indicated that it was only a deadline for replying, but that paragraph 5 allowed longer
periods for executing the assistance requested.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 214
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. The request for assistance shall contain all the necessary information523, including the purpose
of the request and reasons for the request. Information exchanged shall be used only for the purpose

for which it was requested.

4. A supervisory authority to which a request for assistance is addressed may not refuse to

comply with it unless:

(a) it is not competent for the subject-matter of the request or for the measures it is requested to

 

524
execute ; or

(b) compliance with the request would be incompatible with the provisions of this Regulation g

with Union or Member State law to which the supervisory authority receiving the request is subject.

 

5. The requested supervisory authority shall inform the requesting supervisory authority of the
results or, as the case may be, of the progress or the measures taken in order to respond to the

request. In cases of a refusal under paragraph 4. it shall explain its reasons for refusing the
525

 

request

6. Supervisory authorities shall, as a rule, supply the information requested by other supervisory

. . . 526 . .
authorities by electronic means , us1ng a standardised format.

 

523

EE and SE scrutiny reservation.
524

Several delegations stressed the importance of establishing which is the competent DPA:
DE, EE, SE, SI, and IT asked for further clariﬁcation.

RO scrutiny reservation.

PT (supported by RO) suggested adding "or other means if for some reason, electronic
means are not available, and the communication is urgent".

525
526

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 215
ANNEX DGD2C EN

7. No fee shall be charged for any action taken following a request for mutual assistance.
Supervisory authorities may agree with other supervisory authorities rules for indemniﬁcation by
other supervisory authorities for speciﬁc expenditure arising from the provision of mutual

. . . . 527
aSSistance in exceptional Circumstances .

8. Where a supervisory authority does not provide the information referred to in paragraph 5
within one month of receiving the request of another supervisory authority, the requesting
supervisory authority may adopt a provisional measure on the territory of its Member State in
accordance with Article 51(1) and shall submit the matter to the European Data Protection Board

(. . .) in accordance with the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57528.

9. The supervisory authority shall specify the period of validity of such a provisional measure

which shall not exceed three months529

. The supervisory authority shall, without delay,
communicate such a measure, together with its reasons for adopting it, to the European Data

Protection Board (. . .) in accordance with the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57.

10. The Commission may specify the format and procedures for mutual assistance referred to in
this article and the arrangements for the exchange of information by electronic means between
supervisory authorities, and between supervisory authorities and the European Data Protection
Board, in particular the standardised format referred to in paragraph 6. Those implementing acts

shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 87(2)53°.

 

527 PT, UK and DE asked for clariﬁcation in relation to the resources needed / and estimate of

costs.

528 EE, FR, R0 and UK reservation. DE scrutiny.

529 DE asked for deletion of this deadline; the measure should be withdrawn if the conditions
for imposing it were no longer fulﬁlled.

53" DE, IT, EE and CZ reservation.
SE, supported by CZ, reservation considering that implementing acts lack sufﬁcient
ﬂexibility.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 216
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 56

Joint operations of supervisory authorities531

1. The supervisory authorities may. where appropriate. conduct joint operations, including joint
investigations and joint enforcement measures in which members or staff from other Member

States' supervisory authorities are involved.

2. In cases where the controller or processor has establishments in several Member States or

where a signiﬁcant number of532 data subjects in more than one Member State are likely to be

 

substantially affected by processing operations, a supervisory authority of each of those Member
States shall have the right to participate in the joint operations, as appropriate. The competent
supervisory authority shall invite the supervisory authority of each of those Member States to take
part in the joint operations concerned and respond without delay to the request of a supervisory
authority to participate.

3. A supervisory authority may, in compliance with its own Member State law, and with the
seconding supervisory authority’s authorisation, confer 1w, including investigative powers on
the seconding supervisory authority’s members or staff involved in joint operations or, in so far as
the law of the Member State of the host supervisory authority permits, allow the seconding
supervisory authority’s members or staff to exercise their investigative powers in accordance with
the law of the Member State of the seconding supervisory authority. Such investigative powers may
be exercised only under the guidance and in the presence of members or staff o_f the host
supervisory authority. The seconding supervisory authority's members or staff shall be subject to

the host supervisory authority's national law. (. . .) 533

 

53' DE, EE, PT and UK scrutiny reservation.
532 COM reservation; IT, supported by FR and CZ suggested stressing the multilateral aspect.
533 DE, LU, PT and COM scrutiny reservation on the deletion of this last phrase.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 217
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3a. Where. in accordance with paragraph 1. staff of a seconding supervisory authority are
operating in another Member State. the Member State of the host supervisory authority shall be
liable for any damage caused by them during their operations. in accordance with the law of the

Member State in whose territory they are operating.

3b. The Member State in whose territory the damage was caused shall make good such damage
under the conditions applicable to damage caused by its own staff. The Member State of the
seconding supervisory authority whose staff has caused damage to any person in the territory of

another Member State shall reimburse the latter in full any sums it has paid to the persons entitled

 

on their behalf.

3c. Without prejudice to the exercise of its rights vis-a-vis third parties and with the exception of

paragraph 3b. each Member State shall refrain. in the case provided for in paragraph 1. from

 

requesting reimbursement of damages it has sustained from another Member States“.

 

5. Where a joint operation is intended and a supervisory authority does not comply within one

month with the obligation laid down in the second sentence of paragraph 2, the other supervisory

 

authorities may adopt a provisional measure on the territory of its Member State in accordance with

Article 51(1).

6. The supervisory authority shall specify the period of validity of a provisional measure referred
to in paragraph 5, which shall not exceed three months. The supervisory authority shall, without

delay, communicate such a measure, together with its reasons for adopting it, to the European Data

 

Protection Board (. . .) in accordance with the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57.

 

53" UK reservation on paras. 3a, 3b and 3c.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 218
ANNEX DGD2C EN

SECTION 2

CONSISTENCY535

Article 5 7

- - 536
Cons1stency mechanism

1. For the purpose set out in Article 46(1a), the supervisory authorities shall co-operate with

each other through the consistency mechanism as set out in this sections”.

2. The European Data Protection Board shall issue an opinion whenever a competent

supervisory authority intends to adopt any of the measures below (. . .). To that end. the competent

 

 

supervisoty authority shall communicate the draft decision to the European Data Protection Board,

when it:
(a) (- - -);
(h) (- - -);

(c) aims at adopting a list of the processing operations subject to the requirement for a data

 

protection impact assessment pursuant to Article 33 2a ; or

(ca) concerns a matter pursuant to Article 38(2b) whether a draft code of conduct or an

amendment or extension to a code of conduct is in compliance with this Regulation; or

 

535 IT and SI scrutiny reservation. DE parliamentary reservation and UK reservation on the role

of COM in the consistency mechanism.

EE, FI and UK scrutiny reservation.

CZ, DE, ES and R0 thought that supervisory authorities of third countries for which there is
an adequacy decision should be involved in the consistency mechanism; if third countries
participated in the consistency mechanism, they would be bound by uniform implementation
and interpretation.

536
537

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 219
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(cb) aims at approving the criteria for accreditation of a body pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article

38a or a certiﬁcation body pursuant to (. . .) paragraph 3 of Article 39a;

(01)

or

(C)

(0

I.“

aims at determining standard data protection clauses referred to in point (c) of Article 42(2);

aims to authorising contractual clauses referred to in point (d) of Article 42(2); or

aims at approving binding corporate rules within the meaning of Article 43.

The European Data Protection Board shall adopt a binding decision in the following cases:

a)

Where. in a case referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 54a. a concerned supervisory
authority has expressed a relevant and reasoned objection to a draft decision of the lead
authority or the lead authority has rejected an objection as being not relevant and/or
reasoned. The binding decision shall concern all the matters which are the subject of the

relevant and reasoned objection. in particular whether there is an infringement of the

Regulation;

Where. there are conﬂicting views on which of the concerned supervisory authorities is

competent for the main establishment;

(...)

Where a competent supervisory authority does not request the opinion of the European
Data Protection Board in the cases mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article. or does not
follow the opinion of the European Data Protection Board issued under Article 58. In
that case. any concerned supervisory authority or the Commission may communicate the

matter to the European Data Protection Board.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 220
DGD2C EN

4. Any supervisory authority. the Chair of the European Data Protection Board or the

 

Commission may request that any matter of general application or producing effects in more than

one Member State be examined by the European Data Protection Board with a view to obtaining an

 

opinion. in particular where a competent supervisory authority does not comply with the obligations
for mutual assistance in accordance with Article 55 or for joint operations in accordance with

Article 56.

 

5. Supervisory authorities and the Commission shall electronically communicate to the

 

European Data Protection Board. using a standardised format any relevant information, including as
the case may be a summary of the facts, the draft decision, the grounds which make the enactment

of such measure necessary, and the views of other concerned supervisory authorities.

 

6. The chair of the European Data Protection Board shall without undue delay electronically
inform the members of the European Data Protection Board and the Commission of any relevant
information which has been communicated to it using a standardised format. The secretariat of the

European Data Protection Board shall, where necessary, provide translations of relevant

information.
Article 58
Opinion by the European Data Protection Board538
1 (. . .)
2 (. . .)
3 (. . .)

 

538 - .
UK scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 221
ANNEX DGD2C EN

7. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 57. the European Data Protection

 

Board shall issue an opinion on the subjec - matter submitted to it provided it has not already issued

 

 

an opinion on the same matter. This opinion shall be adopted within one month by simple majority

of the members of the European Data Protection Board. This period may be extended by a further

 

month. taking into account the complexity of the subject matter. Regarding the draft decision

 

circulated to the members of the Board in accordance with paragraph 6 of Article 57. a member

 

which has not objected within the period indicated by the Chair. shall be deemed to be in agreement

 

with the draft decision.

7a. Within the period referred to in paragraph 7 the competent supervisory authority shall not

 

adopt its draft decision in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 57.

 

7b. The chair of the European Data Protection Board shall inform, without undue delay, the

supervisory authority referred to, as the case may be, in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 57 and the

 

Commission of the opinion and make it public.

8. The supervisory authority referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 57 shall take m account of
the opinion of the European Data Protection Board and shall within two weeks after receiving the
91m, electronically communicate to the chair of the European Data Protection Board whether it
maintains or_will amend its draft decision and, if any, the amended draft decision, using a

standardised format.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 222
ANNEX DGD2C EN

9. Where the concerned supervisory authority informs the chair of the European Data Protection
Board within the period referred to in paragraph 8 that it does not intend to follow the opinion of the

Board. in whole or in part. providing the relevant grounds. paragraph 3 of Article 57 shall apply.

10. (...)

11. (...)

Article 58a

Decisions by the European Data Protection Boardﬂ

1. In the cases referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 57. the European Data Protection Board shall
adopt a decision on the subject-matter submitted to it in order to ensure the correct and
consistent application of this Regulation in individual cases. The decision shall be reasoned

and addressed to the lead supervisory authority and all the concerned supervisory authorities

and binding on them.

2. The decision referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted within one month from the referral of
the subject-matter by a two-third majority of the members of the Board. This period may be

extended by a further month on account of the complexity of the subject-matter.

 

53” PL scrutiny reservation. IE thought the controller should have standing to intervene in the

proceedings before the EDPB.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 223
ANNEX DGD2C EN

In case the Board has been unable to adopt a decision within the periods referred to in
paragraph 2. it shall adopt its decision within two weeks following the expiration of the
second month referred to in paragraph 2 by a simple majority of the members of the Boards“.
In case the members of the Board are split. the decision shall by adopted by the vote of its
m

The concerned supervisory authorities shall not adopt a decision on the subject matter

submitted to the Board under paragraph 1 during the periods referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3.

(...)

The Chair of the European Data Protection Board shall notify. without undue delay. the
decision referred to in paragraph 1 to the concerned supervisory authorities. It shall inform the
Commission thereof. The decision shall be published on the website of the European Data
Protection Board without delay after the supervisory authority has notiﬁed the ﬁnal decision

referred to in paragraph 7.

 

 

540

AT and HU reservation. HU believes that this option will make the general two-thirds
majority rule meaningless and symbolic, since there will be no effective incentive for the
EDPB to adopt a decision that reﬂects the view of the vast majority of DPAs of the Member
States, as eventually every decision could be adopted by only a slight majority of them. It
would also undermine the general validity of the EDPB’s decision, since the fact that the
Board could not come to an agreement on a particular matter supported by at least the two-
thirds of its members might give rise to serious doubts whether the ﬁnding of such decision
is commonly shared across the Union. AT believes that a simple majority would be more
effective and would not prolong the procedure.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 224
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The lead supervisory authority or. as the case may be. the supervisory authority to which the

complaint has been lodged shall adopt their ﬁnal decision on the basis of the decision referred

 

54', without undue delay and at the latest by one month after the European

to in paragraph 1
Data Protection Board has notiﬁed its decision. The lead supervisory authority or. as the case
may be. the supervisory authority to which the complaint has been lodged. shall inform the
European Data Protection Board of the date when its ﬁnal decision is notiﬁed respectively to
the controller or the processor and the data subject. The ﬁnal decision of the concerned
supervisory authorities shall be adopted under the terms of Article 54a, paragraph 4a, 4b M
4bb. The ﬁnal decision shall refer to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 and shall specify
that the decision referred to in paragraph 1 will be published on the website of the European

Data Protection Board in accordance with paragraph 6. The ﬁnal decision shall attach the

decision referred to in paragraph 1.

 

541

FI reservation; would prefer a system under which the EDPB decision would be directly
applicable and would not have to be transposed by the lead DPA.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 225
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 59

Opinion by the Commission542

(...)

Article 60

. 543
Suspenswn of a draft measure

(...)

Article 61

Urgency procedure544

1. In exceptional circumstances, where a concerned supervisory authority considers that there is
an urgent need to act in order to protect rights and freedoms of data subjects, it may, by way of

derogation from the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57545 or the procedure referred to
in Article 54a, immediately adopt provisional measures intended to produce legal effects within the

territory of its own Member State546, with a speciﬁed period of validity. The supervisory authority

 

shall, without delay, communicate those measures M th_e reasons for adopting them. to the other

concerned supervisory authorities. the European Data Protection Board and to the Commission.

 

2. Where a supervisory authority has taken a measure pursuant to paragraph 1 and considers that
ﬁnal measures need urgently be adopted, it may request an urgent opinion or an urgent binding
decision from the European Data Protection Board, giving reasons for requesting such opinion g

decision.

 

542
543
544
545

COM and FR reservation on deletion.

COM and FR reservation on deletion.

DE scrutiny reservation.

HU remarked that it should be clariﬁed whether provisional measures can be adopted
pending a decision by the EDPB. The Presidency thinks that the reference to Article 57
makes it clear that this is indeed possible.

54" COM scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 226
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3. Any supervisory authority may request an urgent opinion or an urgent binding decision. as the
case may be. from the European Data Protection Board where a competent supervisory authority
has not taken an appropriate measure in a situation where there is an urgent need to act, in order to
protect the rights and freedoms of data subjects, giving reasons for requesting such opinion g

decision, including for the urgent need to act.

4. By derogation from paragraph 7 of Article 58 and paragraph 2 of Article 58a. an urgent

opinion or an urgent binding decision referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall be

 

adopted within two weeks by simple majority of the members of the European Data Protection

Board.

Article 62
Implementing acts

1. The Commission may adopt implementing acts of general scope for:

(a) (---)547;
(h) (---);
(C) (---);

(d) specifying the arrangements for the exchange of information by electronic means between
supervisory authorities, and between supervisory authorities and the European Data Protection

Board, in particular the standardised format referred to in Article 57(5) and (6) and in Article

58[ 1548

 

547
548

COM reservation on deletion.
SE, supported by CZ, reservation considering that implementing acts lack sufﬁcient
ﬂexibility.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 227
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to

in Article 87(2).

 

2 (. . .)
3 (. . .)
Article 63
Enforcement
(. . .)
9788/15 CHS/VH/np 228

ANNEX DGD2C EN

Section 3

European Data Protection Board

Article 64
European Data Protection Board

a. The European Data Protection Board is hereby established as body of the Union and shall

have legal personality.

1_b. The European Data Protection Board shall be represented by its Chair.

2. The European Data Protection Board shall be composed of the head of one supervisory
authority of each Member State or hi s/her representative and of the European Data Protection

Supervisor.

3. Where in a Member State more than one supervisory authority is responsible for monitoring
the application of the provisions pursuant to this Regulation, (. . .) a joint representative shall be

appointed in accordance with the national law of that Member State.

4. The Commission and the European Data Protection Supervisor or his/her representative shall
have the right to participate in the activities and meetings of the European Data Protection Board
without voting right. The Commission shall designate a representative. The chair of the European
Data Protection Board shall, communicate to the Commission (...) th_e activities of the European

Data Protection Board.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 229
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 65

Independence

1. The European Data Protection Board shall act independently when performing its tasks or

exercising its powers pursuant to Articles 66 (. . .) and 67.549

2. Without prejudice to requests by the Commission referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 and
in paragraph 2 of Article 66, the European Data Protection Board shall, in the performance of its

tasks or the exercise of its powers. neither seek nor take instructions from anybody550.

Article 66
Tasks of the European Data Protection Board

1. The European Data Protection Board shall promote the consistent application of this
Regulation. To this effect, the European Data Protection Board shall, on its own initiative or at the

request of the Commission, in particular:

(aa) monitor and ensure the correct application of this Regulation in the cases provided for in

Article 57(3) without prejudice to the tasks of national supervisory authorities;

(a) advise the Commission on any issue related to the protection of personal data in the Union,

including on any proposed amendment of this Regulation;

 

549
550

UK and SI scrutiny reservation.
DE scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 230
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) examine, on its own initiative or on request of one of its members or on request of the
Commission, any question covering the application of this Regulation and issue guidelines,

recommendations and best practices in order to encourage consistent application of this Regulation;

(ba) draw up guidelines for supervisory authorities concerning the application of measures referred
to in paragraph 1. 1b and 1c of Article 53 and the ﬁxing of administrative ﬁnes pursuant to Articles

79 and 79am;

(c) review the practical application of the guidelines, recommendations and best practices
referred to in points (b) and (ba);

(ca) encourage the drawing-up of codes of conduct and the establishment of data protection

certiﬁcation mechanisms and data protection seals and marks pursuant to Articles 38 and 39;

(cb) carry out the accreditation of certiﬁcation bodies and its periodic review pursuant to Article
39a and maintain a public register of accredited bodies pursuant to paragraph 6 of Article 39a and
of the accredited controllers or processors established in third countries pursuant to paragraph 4 of

Article 39552;

(cd) specify the requirements mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 39a with a view to the

accreditation of certiﬁcation bodies under Article 39;

 

(ce) give the Commission an opinion on the level of protection of personal data in third countries

or international organisations. in particular in the cases referred to in Article 41;

 

55' DK constitutional reservation on the introduction of administrative ﬁnes, irrespective of the

level of the ﬁnes.
HU said that paragraphs (ca) and (cb) were contrary to the text of the general approach
reached in June 2014 (1 1028/ 14); it is for the national supervisory authority to do this.

552

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 231
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(d) issue opinions on draft decisions of supervisory authorities pursuant to the consistency
mechanism referred to in paragraph 2 and on matters submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of

Article 57;

(e) promote the co-operation and the effective bilateral and multilateral exchange of information

and practices between the supervisory authorities;

(f) promote common training programmes and facilitate personnel exchanges between the
supervisory authorities, as well as, where appropriate, with the supervisory authorities of third

countries or of international organisations;

(g) promote the exchange of knowledge and documentation on data protection legislation and

practice with data protection supervisory authorities worldwide;

(h) (---);

(i) maintain a publicly accessible electronic register of decisions taken by supervisory authorities

and courts on issues dealt with in the consistency mechanism.

2. Where the Commission requests advice from the European Data Protection Board, it may

indicate a time limit, taking into account the urgency of the matter.

3. The European Data Protection Board shall forward its opinions, guidelines, recommendations,
and best practices to the Commission and to the committee referred to in Article 87 and make them

public.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 232
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 67
Reports

2. The European Data Protection Board shall draw up an annual report regarding the protection

 

of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data in the Union and where relevant

 

in third countries and international organisations. The report shall be made public andm

transmitted to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission.

3. The annual report shall include a review of the practical application of the guidelines,
recommendations and best practices referred to in point (c) of Article 66(1) as well as of the binding

decisions referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 57.

Article 68

Procedure

 

1. The European Data Protection Board shall adopt binding decisions referred to in paragraph 3
of Article 57 in accordance with majority requirements set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 58a.
As regards decisions related to the other tasks listed in Article 66 hereof. they shall be taken by a

simple majority of its members.

 

2. The European Data Protection Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure by a two-third
majority of its members and organise its own operational arrangements.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 233
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 69
Chair

1. The European Data Protection Board shall elect a chair and two deputy chairs from amongst
553

its members by simple majority—(. . .)554.

2. The term of ofﬁce of the chair and of the deputy chairs shall be ﬁve years and be renewable

555
once—.

Article 70
Tasks of the chair

1. The chair shall have the following tasks:

(a) to convene the meetings of the European Data Protection Board and prepare its agenda;

(aa) to notify decisions adopted by the European Data Protection Board pursuant to Article 58a to

 

the lead supervisory authority and the concerned supervisory authorities;

 

(b) to ensure the timely performance of the tasks of the European Data Protection Board, in

particular in relation to the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 57.

2. The European Data Protection Board shall lay down the attribution of tasks between the chair

and the deputy chairpersons in its rules of procedure.

 

553
554
555

IE proposal.
COM reservation on deletion.
COM scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 234
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 71

Secretariat

1. The European Data Protection Board shall have a secretariat, which shall be provided by the

secretariat af the European Data Protection Supervisor (. . .).

1a. The secretariat shall perform its tasks exclusively under the instructions of the Chair of the

European Data Protection Board.

1b. The staff of the secretariat of the European Data Protection Supervisor involved in carrying
out the tasks conferred on the European Data Protection Board by this Regulation shall be
organizationally separated from. and subject to separate reporting lines from the staff involved in

carrying out tasks conferred on the European Data Protection Supervisors“.

Q Where needed. the European Data Protection Board in consultation with the European Data
Protection Supervisor shall establish and publish a Code of Conduct implementing this Article and
applicable to the staff of the secretariat of the European Data Protection Supervisor involved in

carrying out the tasks conferred on the European Data Protection Board by this Regulation.

557
l

2. The secretariat shall provide analytica , administrative and logistical support to the

European Data Protection Board.

3. The secretariat shall be responsible in particular for:

(a) the day-to-day business of the European Data Protection Board;

 

556
557

CZ reservation on last part of the task.
UK suggested deleting "analytical".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 235
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(b) the communication between the members of the European Data Protection Board, its chair,

and the Commission and for communication with other institutions and the public;

(c) the use of electronic means for the internal and external communication;

(d) the translation of relevant information;

(e) the preparation and follow-up of the meetings of the European Data Protection Board;

(f) the preparation, drafting and publication of opinions, decisions on the settlement of disputes

between supervisory authorities and other texts adopted by the European Data Protection Board.

Article 72

Confidentialityssg

1. The discussions559 of the European Data Protection Board shall be conﬁdential.

2. Access to documents submitted to members of the European Data Protection Board, experts

and representatives of third parties shall be governed by Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001.

 

558 DE, EE, ES, Ro, PL, PT, SE and UK reservation: it was thought that the EDPB should

operate in a manner as transparent as possible and a general conﬁdentiality duty was
obviously not conducive to this. This article should be revisited once there is more clarity on
the exact role and powers of the board, including the question whether the EDPS shall
ensure the Secretariat.

IT scrutiny reservation: it suggested replacing this term with 'minutes' or 'summary records',
thereby distinguishing between conﬁdentiality of decision-making and access to documents.

559

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 236
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER VIII

REMEDIES, LIABILITY AND SANCTIONS560

Article 73

Right to lodge a complaint with a supervison authority561

1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or judicial remedy, every data subject shall

have the right to lodge a complaint with a single supervisory authority. in particular562 in the

 

Member State of his or her habitual residence. place of work or place of the alleged infringement. if
the data subject considers that the processing of personal data relating to him or her does not

comply with this Regulations“.

2. (...)
3. (...)
4. (...)

5. The supervisory authority to which the complaint has been lodged shall inform the
complainant on the progress and the outcome of the complaint including the possibility of a judicial

remedy pursuant to Article 74 (. . .).

 

56" AT, FR, EE, ES and R0 scrutiny reservation.

56' CY, CZ, LY, and SI scrutiny reservation.

562 COM, BG, IT, SI and LU though that the data subject should be able to lodge a complaint
with any DPA without limitation since the protection of personal data was a fundamental
right.

563 DE suggested adding "when its rights are not being respected".

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 237
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 74

Right to an etZectiveM judicial remedy against a supervisory authority565

1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy. each natural or legal
person shall have the right to an effective judicial remedy against a legally binding decision of a

. . . 566
superVisory authority concerning them. .

2. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy. each data subject shall
have the right to an effective judicial remedy where the supervisory authority competent in
accordance with Article 51 and Article 51a does not deal with a complaint or does not inform the
data subject567 within three months or any shorter period provided under Union or Member State

la_w568 on the progress or outcome of the complaint lodged under Article 73 569,

3. (...) Proceedings against a (. . .) supervisory authority shall be brought before the courts of the

Member State where the supervisory authority is established.

 

564 Eﬂective has been added, in line with Article 47 in the Charter. In particular recital 113

illustrates what an effective legal remedy means in this context: 'Those courts should
exercise full jurisdiction which should include jurisdiction to examine all questions of fact
and law relevant to the dispute before it'.

SI reservation. UK scrutiny reservation.

DE, supported by CZ, IE and SE, suggested adding: 'by which it is adversely affected'. FI
thought that concerning them was too vague and suggested addressed to them or: (drafting
is taken from Article 263 TFEU). However this criterion for ECJ litigation may not be
necessarily be valid for remedies before national courts, the admissibility of which will be
determined by national law.

FI and SE indicated that the right to a judicial remedy if an authority did not take action was
unknown in their legal system. FI suggested a recital to solve this issue (footnote under
recital 1 1 1).

SI indicated that under its law the DPA was obliged to reply within two months.

SE scrutiny reservation. NO wanted to delete paragraph 2 since a court review would
endanger the independency of the DPA.

565

566

567

568
569

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 238
ANNEX DGD2C EN

3a. Where proceedings are brought against a decision of a supervisory authority which was
preceded by an opinion or a decision of the European Data Protection Board in the consistency

mechanism. the supervisory authority shall forward that opinion or decision to the court.

4. (...)

5. (...)570

Article 75

Right to an effective judicial remedy against a controller or processor”1

1. Without prejudice to any available administrative or non-judicial remedy572, including the
right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority ader Article 73, data subjects shall have the
right to an effective judicial remedy if they consider that their rights under this Regulation have
been infringed as a result of the processing of their personal data in non-compliance with this

Regulation. 573

 

57" COM reservation on deletion of paragraphs 4 and 5. DE scrutiny reservation on deletion of

paragraphs 4 and 5.
571 DE, PL, PT, SI and SK scrutiny reservation. ES reservation. FR, supported by BE,
suggested to introduce a recital (new recital 117) stating that contractual clauses that do not
respect Article 75 would be void. FR indicated that Facebook had been convicted in France
for having inserted such a clause in a contract. SK found that questions on recognition and
enforcement of judgements should be resolved and text inserted into the GDPR.
SI wanted to delete non-judicial remedy.
AT said that the possibility of parallel proceedings about the same object was not provided
under its legal system and proposed to limit the possibility of a judicial remedy to cases
where the DPA cannot take a decision. FR thought that it was necessary to clarify that the
processor might be responsible independently of the controller, e. g. pursuant to Article 30 or
according to a certiﬁcation.

572
573

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 239
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2. Proceedings against a controller or a processor shall be brought before the courts of the

574. Alternatively, such

Member State where the controller or processor has an establishment (. . .)
proceedings may be brought before the courts of the Member State where the data subject has his or
a habitual residence, unless the controller or processorﬂ is a public authority acting in the

- - - 576
exerc1se of its public powers .

3. (...)
4. (...)

 

574 In view of the concerns raised, the reference to national law has been kept only in

recital 1 13.

FR wanted to delete processor: in its opinion a processor cannot be a public authority.

UK scrutiny reservation: found the second part of the paragraph unusual. DE, supported by
PL and SI, suggested to add text in the end of the paragraph with a reference to the Brussels
I Regulation indicating that the provisions of the present Regulation took precedence over
the provisions of the Brussels I Regulation.

575
576

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 240
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1a.

Article 76 577

Representation of data subjects

The data subject shall have the right to mandate a body, organisation or association, which

has been properly constituted according to the law of a Member State and whose statutory

 

objectives include the protection of data subjects’ rights and ﬁeedoms with regard to the

protection of their personal data, to lodge th_e complaint on his or her behalf 578 and to

exercise the rights referred to in Articles 3, 74 and 75 on his or her behalf579.

 

(...)580

 

577

578

579

580

DE, PT, R0 and SI scrutiny reservation. CZ, EE, MT, NL, SI and UK thought this article
was superﬂuous.

NL had serious concerns with paragraph 1 because it feared that a system with class action
like in the US would be introduced and pointed to the links with Articles 75 and 77. NL
therefore suggested, supported by BE and BG, to add 'this body, organisation or association
does not have the right to claim damages on his/her behalf, but mentioned that this text
could go into a recital.

DE parliamentary reservation; EE and F1 reservation and HU scrutiny reservation. EE,
supported by HU and SE, thought that the data subject could choose anybody to represent
her/him so this drafting was a limitation so a reference to national law was needed. Support
from SE. FI, supported by ES, suggested to add in the end of the paragraph ‘in accordance
with criteria laid down in national law’. FI also suggested to start paragraph 1 as follows:
'Any body ...may lodge a complaint when the data subject has mandated it, ...behalf in
accordance with national law. FI explained that this was to clarify that no body/organisation
had an obligation to act which went too far for F1; support from ES that preferred to leave
that for national law.

FR asked for its reinsertion. BG welcomed its deletion.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 241
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2. Member States may581 provide that any body. organisation or association referred to in
paragraph 1. independently of a data subject's mandate ( . . .), shall have in such Member State the

right to lodge a complaint with the supervisory authority competent in accordance with Article 73

582583 584
and —

t_o exercise the rights referred to in Articles 73. 74 and 75 if it considers that the rights
of a data subject have been infringed as a result of the processing of personal data that is not in

compliance with this Regulation.

 

4. (...)585

 

58’ COM reservation. COM and FR wanted to replace may with shall. CZ, EE, ES, NL could in
a spirit of compromise accept paragraph 2; NL on condition that may remained. BG, DE,
DK, HU, EL, IE, MT also supported may. HU suggested to broaden the scope of the Article
to cover all kinds of non-compliance of the Regulation. BG suggested in addition to set out,
either in the body of the text or by referring to national law, a period of time in which the
affected data subject would have the possibility to conﬁrm his/her interest and to join the
complaint or to withdraw it. In case there is no affected concrete data subject or he/she could
not be identiﬁed, the complaint lodged will serve as a signal for the SA to start a check for a
breach.

COM said that the added value of the was that an organisation that had been recognised in
on MS could mandate such an organisation in another MS.

IE, RO, UK supported new paragraph 2. FR asked for the reinsertion of former paragraph 2.
EL thought that is should be for national law to set out such possibilities. FR joined EL in
that if the right for a body to lodge a complaint was not compulsory (shall) there was no
need for the provision and the MS could set it out in their national law. BG wanted to
introduce text allowing the data subject to conﬁrm its interest in the action or withdraw its
interest.

Aligned to the wording of paragraph 1.

COM scrutiny reservation on deletion of paragraphs 3 to 5. FR reservation on the deletion of
paragraphs 3 to 4.

582

583

584
585

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 242
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 76a

. . 586
Suspenswn of proceedings—

1. Where a competent court of a Member State has information587 on proceedings concerning
the same subject matter as regards processing (...) of the same controller or processor are pending in
a court in another Member State. it shall588 contact that court in the other Member State to conﬁrm

the existence of such proceedings.

 

2. Where proceedings concerning the same subject matter as regards processing (...) of the same
controller or processor are pending in a court in another Member State. any competent court other

than the court ﬁrst seized may589 suspend590 its proceedingsw

Q Where these proceedings are pending at ﬁrst instance. any court other than the court ﬁrst
seized may also. on the application of one of the parties. decline jurisdiction if the court ﬁrst seized

has jurisdiction over the actions in question and its law permits the consolidation thereof.

 

58“ AT, BE, CY, EE, ES, FI, FR, PL, PT, SE and SI scrutiny reservation. PL, supported by F1,
wanted it to be explained what same processing activities thought: same scope or also
related cases. ES thought that lispendens necessitated the same persons, same proceeding,
same object of dispute and same claim and that that could be difﬁcult to establish.UK,
supported by FR, cautioned against having a too prescriptive text, support from FR. SE
thought that GDPR should not regulate lis pendens, but left to the DPAs and courts to
decide. NO and FR asked how this text related to Regulation No 44/2001 and the Lugano
Convention FI considered that it was necessary to have rules on this question in GDPR. MT
found the text too prescriptive.

FR suggested to say is informed instead of has information to clarify that the parties had to
inform the court.

EL and MT, suggested to replace "shall" with "may". FR suggested to add at the request of a
party clarifying that the court was not supposed to act of its own motion.

PL found it illogical that courts shall contact other courts in paragraph 1 but that they only
may suspend proceedings. PL and CZ therefore preferred that the other courts were obliged
to suspend their proceedings (shall and mot may) in paragraph 2.

PL and SK thought that it was difﬁcult to force courts to stay proceedings waiting for
another court to decide. HU supported by SK, asked how it was possible for a court to know
that another case was going on elsewhere. HU asked how it would be established which
court was ﬁrst seized if several courts in several Member States were seized on the same
day.

FR suggested adding in the end of the paragraph: provided that such suspension respects the
procedural rights of the parties to the proceedings.

587

588

589

590

591

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 243
ANNEX DGD2C EN

I.“

LN

(...).

Article 77

Right to compensation and liability592

Any person who has suffered material or immaterial 593damage as a result of a processing
which is not in compliance with this Regulation594 shall have the right to receive

compensation from the controller or the processor for the damage suffered.

Any controller (...) involved in the processing shall be liable for the damage caused by the
processing which is not in compliance with this Regulation. A processor shall be liable for

(. . .) the damage caused by the processing only where it has not complied with obligations of
this Regulation speciﬁcally directed to processors or acted outside or contrary to lawful

instructions of the controller.

 

592

593
594

IE, PL and EL reservation. Several Member States (DE, NL and UK) have queried whether
there was an EU concept of damage and compensation or whether this was left to Member
State law. IT suggested specifying that these rules are to be applied according to national
law, support from CZ, NL, R0 and SI. COM thinks that it has to be left to ECJ to interpret
these rules and concepts. FR scrutiny reservation; FR questioned the division of
responsibilities and the link to Articles 24 and 25 and national law in this ﬁeld as well as the
principle of subsidiarity. IE asked from whom the data subject could seek compensation,
since paragraphs 2 and 3 were contradictory. Nor UK liked the joint and separately
responsibility and paragraphs 2 and 3 were contradictory. FI supported IE and UK and said
that the processor had too much responsibility. AT favoured full and joint several liability.
EL also preferred joint and several liability. At the comment from a number of delegations
that recital 118 and Article 77 were inconsistent the Chair of Coreper decided that further
work was necessary.

DE, HU, NO, SE and SK suggestion.

EL raised strong concerns that the notion of 'unlawful processing' as used in the1995
Directive were not repeated here and feared that this would lower the level of protection. EL
further found the current wording of the GDPR too restrictive since national provisions and
measures are not covered. EL therefore suggested inserting the following text in the ﬁrst
paragraph or in a chapeau: 'The application of the provisions of Article 77(1) and (2) cannot
prejudice the application of national provisions in matters relating to tort, delicts and quasi-
delicts.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 244
ANNEX DGD2C EN

IU‘i

l?)

A controller or the processor shall be exempted from liability in accordance with paragraph 2.
m

 

(. . .) if (. . .) i_t proves that it is not in any way responsible (. . .) , for the event giving rise to

the damage.

Where more than one controller or processor or a controller and a processor are involved in
the same processing and. where they are. in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, responsible
for any damage caused by the processing. ( . . .) each controller or processor shall be held ( . . .)

liable for the entire damagem

 

Where a controller or processor has. in accordance with paragraph 4. paid full compensation
for the damage suffered. that controller or processor shall be entitled to claim back from the
other controllers or processors involved in the same processing that part of the compensation

corresponding to their part of responsibility for the damage in accordance with the conditions

set out in paragraph 2.

Court proceedings for exercising the right to receive compensation shall be brought before
the courts competent under national law of the Member State referred to in paragraph 2 of

Article 75.

 

595
596

EL preferred in whole or in part.

UK suggested to insert the following text to paragraph 4: "However where more than one
controller or processor or a controller and a processor is joined to the same proceeding,
compensation may be apportioned according to the responsibility of each controller or
processor for the damage caused by the processing, only if the outcome of such distribution
ensures full and eﬂective compensation for the data subject. " The Presidency suggests to
insert part of this suggestion into recital 118.

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 245
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 78
Penalties

(. . -)597

Article 79

General conditions for imposing administrative tines

598

1. Each supervisory authority shall (...) ensure that the imposition of administrative ﬁnes

 

pursuant to this Article in respect of infringements of this Regulation referred to in Article 79a
599

 

(. . .) shall in each individual case b_e eﬂective, proportionate and dissuasive.

 

597

This Article was moved to Article 79b. Scrutiny reservation by SK, R0 and PT.
598

It was pointed out (FI) that the empowerment for Member States to provide for
administrative sanctions and measures was already covered by Article 53(1b).

Moved from paragraph 2. F1 thought that paragraph 2 was not necessary since paragraph 2a
provided concrete content for the general wording of paragraph 2.

599

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 246
ANNEX DGD2C EN

2a.

(a)

(h)

(C)
(d)

(C)

(0
(8)

Administrative ﬁnes shall600, depending on the circumstances of each individual case, be

 

imposed in addition to, or instead of measures referred to in points (a) to (f) of paragraph lb

of Article 536'”. When deciding whether to impose an administrative ﬁne (...)602

 

and 603deciding on the amount of the administrative ﬁne in each individual case due regard

shall604 be given (...) to the following:605

the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement having regard to the nature scope or

 

purpose of the processing concerned as well as the number of data subjects affected and the

 

level of damage suffered by them;

 

the intentional or negligent character of the infringement,

(---);

action taken by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects;

 

the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor having regard to technical and

 

organisational measures implemented by them pursuant to Articles 23 and 30;

 

ay relevant previous infringements by the controller or processor;

(...)-606

 

600
601

602

603

604

605

606

CZ, FR, SE and UK suggested to change shall to may.

Some delegations thought that the corrective measures of Article 53 (1b) should be listed
rather here.

Deleted further to F1 suggestion.

Some delegations (EE, SK, PL) thought that aggravating circumstances should be
distinguished from mitigating circumstances. SK suggested laying down exact thresholds

(e. g. more than 2/3 of the maximum ﬁne in case of aggravating circumstances).

UK suggested to insert as appropriate. DE was generally happy with the text since the list in
was open and not all aspects needed to be considered. COM pointed at point (m) conﬁrming
that it was an open list.

PL and FR suggested that guidelines by the Board could be useful here or at least in a
recital.

Deleted further to DK, ES, FR, FI and SI reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 247
ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

(h) the manner in which the infringement became known to the supervisory authority. in

particular whether. and if so to what extent. the controller or processor notiﬁed the

infringement607;

(i) in case measures referred to in (. . .) and points (a). (d). (e) and (f) of paragraph 1b of

Article 53. have previously been ordered against the controller or processor concerned with

 

regard to the same subject-matter608. compliance with these measures;

 

(j) adherence to approved codes of conduct pursuant to Article 38 or approved certiﬁcation

mechanisms pursuant to Article 39“”;

(k) (- - -);
(1) (- - -);
(a) any other aggravating or mitigating factor applicable to the circumstances of the case.
3. (. . .)610
3a. (. . .)611

3b. Each Member State may lay down the rules on whether and to what extent administrative

 

ﬁnes may be imposed on public authorities and bodies established in that Member State'm.

 

 

607 CZ and SE were concerned that this factor might amount to a violation of the privilege

against self-incrimination.

IT thought this paragraph should refer more generally to previous incidents. DE and FR
pleaded for its deletion.

CZ, FR, EE and SI reservation: DE pointed out that non-adherence to approved codes of
conduct or approved certiﬁcation mechanisms could as such not amount to a violation of the
Regulation. IT found this point problematic and said that if the chapeau was reworded point
(i) could be deleted.

COM reservation on deletion; linked to reservation on Article 79a.

COM reservation on deletion.

DE would prefer to rule out this possibility in the Regulation. ES thought it should be
provided that no administrative ﬁnes can be imposed on the public sector. FR strongly
supported paragraph 3b.

608

609

610
611
612

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 248
ANNEX DGD2C EN

The exercise by the supervisory authority (. . .) of its powers under this Article shall be subject

 

 

to appropriate procedural safeguards in conformity with Union law and Member State law.

including effective judicial remedy and due process.

Member States may abstain from providing rules for administrative ﬁnes as referred to in
paragraphs 1. 2 and 3 of Article 79a where their legal system does not provide for
administrative ﬁnes and the infringements referred to therein are already subject to criminal
sanctions in their national law by [date referred to in Article 91(2)]. while ensuring that these
criminal sanctions are effective. proportionate and dissuasive. taking into account the level of

administrative ﬁnes provided for in this Regulation.m

Where they so decide. Member States shall notify. to the Commission. the relevant parts of

their criminal law6'4.

 

613

614

IE thought that the last part of the paragraph. from 'taking into account ...' could go too far
and limit the MS rights to legislate severer sanctions; it therefore suggested to delete that
same part of the paragraph. Cion opposed IE and said that the last part was necessary, the
sanctions should at least be in line with administrative ﬁnes.

This paragraph builds upon a similar provision in Article 30(1) of the 2014 Market Abuse
Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and the Council of 16 April 2014
on market abuse (market abuse regulation) and repealing Directive 2003/6/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Directives 2003/124/EC,
2003/125/EC and 2004/72/EC, OJ 12.06.2014, L 173, p. 1. AT, HU scrutiny reservation.
DE, DK, E, NL, EE and SE supported the text whereas FR, IE and PL could not accept it..
COM suggested text setting out that ‘ where national law of the MS don’t provide for
administrative sanctions ...’ COM also suggested setting. DK thought that the legal basis
(Article 16 TFEU) does not allow for the harmonisation of criminal law.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 249
ANNEX DGD2C EN

1.

Article 79a
Administrative tinesgm

The supervisory authority_(. . .) may impose a ﬁne that shall not exceed 250 000 EUR, or 617in

case of an undertaking 0,5 %618 of its total worldwide annual turnover 61” of the preceding ﬁnancial

 

year, on a controller who, intentionally or negligently:

 

615

616

617

618

619

DK reservation on the introduction of administrative ﬁnes in the text as administrative ﬁnes
— irrespective of their level — raise constitutional concerns. DE, EE, ES, IE and PT scrutiny
reservation. FI and SI reservation. COM reservation on replacing ‘shall’ by ‘may’. DE
wanted the risk-based approach to be made clearer. DE thought that proportionality was
important because Article 79a concerned fundamental rights/rule of law and deemed it
disproportionate that a supervisory authority could impose a ﬁne that the data subject was
unaware of. DE said that it was necessary to set out the ﬁnes clearly and that the one-stop
shop principle did not allow for exceptions being set out in national law. IE thought e
gravity of offences was not sufﬁciently illustrated, e. g. infringement in para. 3(m), which
according to IE is the most serious one. FR reservation: the strictness of the text may
impinge on the independence of the DPA. ES also wanted to give ﬂexibility to the DPA.

A majority of Member States (BE, CY DE, EE, ES, FI, IT, LV, MT and NL) appear to be in
favour of different scales of sanctions. COM referred to the Market Abuse Regulation with
three levels of ﬁnes. HU, IE, SE and UK were opposed to maintaining different sanctions
scales. FR and PL did not favour it, but could accept it. SI said that it was impossible to have
amounts in the Article. In contrast NL wanted to set out amounts.

FI suggested to insert i'f higher to clarify that the higher amount is the maximum amount for
sanctions, also valid for paragraphs 2 and 3.

EE did not consider it appropriate to set out sanctions in percentage because the sanction
was not predictable. PT considered that there should be minimum penalties for a natural
person and that for SMEs and micro enterprises the volume of the business should not be
looked at when applying the ﬁnes (this factor should only be applicable for multinationals).
PL thought that administrative ﬁnes should be implemented in the same way in all MS. PL
said that the ﬁnes should be ﬂexible and high enough to represent a deterrent, also for
overseas companies. ES saw practical problems with worldwide ﬁnes. UK noted that the
levels of ﬁnes in the EP report were far too high.

UK commented that turnover was used in competition law and asked whether the harm was
the same here. EE asked how the annual turnover was connected to the sanction. SI thought
that compared to competition law where the damage concerned the society as a whole, data
protection concerned private infringements. COM said that both competition law and data
protection concern economic values, whereas data protection protects values of the data
subject. COM further said that the ﬁnes must be dissuasive and that it was necessary to refer
to something, e. g. percentage but that it was also necessary with a sufﬁciently broad scope
to take into account the speciﬁcities of the case. UK thought that name and shame would be
a more efﬁcient practice than ﬁnes. UK further said that high ﬁnes would entail two
problems: they would be challenged in court more often and controllers might get less help
to verify a potential breach. DE, supported by FR, thought that the ﬁnes set out in Article
79a were only the maximum level and that question of ﬁnes could be submitted to the
Ministers in June JHA Council. COM agreed that the Article only set out maximum ﬁnes
and that the companies themselves would provide the amounts of the turnover.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 250
ANNEX DGD2C EN

 

(a) does not respond within the period referred to in Article 12(2) to requests of the data

subj ect;

(b) charges a fee in violation of the ﬁrst sentence of paragraph 4 of Article 12.

2. The supervisory authority 1... ) may impose a ﬁne that shall not exceed 500 000 EUR, or in

case of an undertaking 1% of its total worldwide annual (. . .) turnover of the preceding ﬁnancial

 

year. on a controller or processor who, intentionally or negligently:

 

(a) does not provide the information, or (. . .) provides incomplete information, or does not
provide the information [timely or| in a [sufﬁciently] transparent manner, to the data subject
pursuant to Articles 1213 ), 14 and 14a;

(b) does not provide access for the data subject or does not rectify personal data pursuant to

Articles 15 and 16 (...);

(c) does not erase personal data in violation of the right to erasure and 'to be forgotten' pursuant

to Article 17(l)(a). l7(l)(b). 17(l)(d) or 17(l)(e);

 

 

(d) (---)

(da) processes personal data in violation of the right to restriction of processing pursuant to Article

 

17a or does not inform the data subject before the restriction of processing is lifted pursuant to

Article 17a(4),'

 

(db) does not communicate any rectiﬁcation. erasure or restriction of processing to each recipient

 

to whom the controller has disclosed personal data. in violation of Article 17b;

 

(dc) does not provide the data subject’s personal data concerning him or her ( . . .) in violation of

Article 18'

 

 

(dd) processes personal data after the objection of the data subject pursuant to Article 19(1) and

 

does not demonstrate compelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests.

 

rights and freedoms of the data subject or for the establishment. exercise or defence of legal claims;

 

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 251
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(de) does not provide the data subject with information concerning the right to object processing
for direct marketing purposes pursuant to Article 19( 2) or continues to process data for direct

marketing purposes after the objection of the data subject in violation of Article 19( 2a);

(e) does not or not sufﬁciently determine the respective responsibilities with joint controllers

pursuant to Article 24;

(f) does not or not sufﬁciently620 maintain the documentation pursuant to Article 28 M Article

31(4).

(8) (---)

|UJ

The supervisory authority 1... ) may impose a ﬁne that shall not exceed 1 000 000 EUR or, in
case of an undertaking, 2 % of its total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding ﬁnancial

year. on a controller or processor who, intentionally or negligently:

 

(a) processes personal data without a (. . .) legal basis for the processing or does not comply with

the conditions for consent pursuant to Articles 6, 7, 8 and 9;
(h) (- - -);
(C) (- - -);

(d) does not comply with the conditions in relation to (. . .)automated individual decision making

including proﬁling pursuant to Article 20;

 

(da) does not (. . .) implement appropriate measures or is not able to demonstrate compliance

pursuant to Articles 22 (. . .) and 30;

 

62" IE, supported by S1, pointed it that a number of the terms used here (such as "sufﬁciently",

"timely" and "incomplete") were so vague that they were not compatible with the [ex certa
principle. DE agreed with IE and added that it was a problem of objective of the provisions:
on the one side the need for the controller to know what the rules are and on the other side
the ﬂexibility for the DPA.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 252
ANNEX DGD2C EN

(db) does not designate a representative in violation of Article 25;
(dc) processes or instructs the processing of personal data in violation of (. . .) Articles 26;

(dd) does not alert on or notify a personal data breach or does not [timely or] completely notify the

data breach to the supervisory authority or to the data subject in violation of Articles 31 and 32;

(de) does not carry out a data protection impact assessment in violation of Article 33 or processes

personal data without prior consultation of the supervisory authority in violation of Article 34(2);

(C) (---);

(f) misuses a data protection seal or mark in the meaning of Article 39 or does not comply with

the conditions and procedures laid down in Articles 38a and 39a;

(g) carries out or instructs a data transfer to a recipient in a third country or an international

organisation in violation of Articles 41 to 44;

(h) does not comply with an order or a temporary or deﬁnite limitation on processing or the
suspension of data ﬂows by the supervisory authority pursuant to Article 53 (lb) or does not

provide access in violation of Article 53(1).

 

(i) (...)621
(i) (...).

3a. If a controller or processor intentionally or negligently violates several provisions of this

Regulation listed in paragraphs 1. 2 or 3. the total amount of the ﬁne may not exceed the

amount speciﬁed for the gravest violation.m

 

 

62’ IT wanted to reinstate failure to cooperate with the DPO. IE thought that this was a

subjective infringement.

622 PL and FR wanted to keep paragraph 3a.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 253
ANNEX DGD2C EN

4. (...)623

Article 79b

Penalties 624

1. For inﬁingements (...)ofthis Regulation in particular for infringements which are not subject
to administrative ﬁnes pursuant to (. . .)Article 79a Member States shall625 lay down the rules on
penalties applicable to such infringements and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they

are implemented (...). Such penalties shall be ejfective, proportionate and dissuasive.

2. (...).

3. Each Member State shall notijy to the Commission those provisions of its law which it adopts
pursuant to paragraph 1, by the date speciﬁed in Article 91 (2) at the latest and, without delay, any

subsequent amendment aﬂecting them.

 

623 CZ, DE, HU, NL and R0 reservation. NL that thought that guidelines from the EDPB could
solve the problems on the amounts. CZ wanted to delete the paragraph and thought that the
DPA could set out the amounts.

62" AT, DE, DK, ES, FR, PL and PT and SK scrutiny reservation. COM explained that
infringements not listed in Article 79a were those under national law, referred to in Chapter
IX, for example infringements in employment law and relating to freedom of expression. In
that way Article 79b is complementary to the list in Article 79 and does not exclude other
penalties. IT thought it was better to delete the Article but lay down the possibility to
legislate at national level. FR reservation on the imposition of criminal penalties. DE in
favour of referring expressis verbis to criminal penalties. IE concerned that the provision
would apply to infringements of the freedom of expression laws. In the same vein EE raised
concerns because EE doesn’t have laws on the freedom of expression.

625 -
HU reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 254
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER IX
PROVISIONS RELATING TO SPECIFIC DATA PROCESSING
SITUATIONS

Article 80
Processing of personal data and freedom of expression and information

The national law of the Member State shall (. . .) reconcile the right to the protection of
personal data pursuant to this Regulation with the right to freedom of expression and
information. including the processing of personal data for journalistic purposes and the

purposes of academic. artistic or literary expression.

For the processing of personal data carried out for journalistic purposes or the purpose of
academic artistic or literary expression. Member States shall626 provide for exemptions or
derogations from the provisions in Chapter II (principles). Chapter III (rights of the data
subject). Chapter IV (controller and processor). Chapter V (transfer of personal data to third
countries or international organizations). Chapter VI (independent supervisory authorities).
Chapter VII (co-operation and consistency)627 if they are necessary to reconcile the right to

the protection of personal data with the freedom of expression and information (. . .).

 

626

627

HU, AT, SI and SE reservation; they would prefer not to limit this paragraph to journalistic
processing.

BE, DE, FR, IE and SE had requested to include also a reference to Chapter VIII. This was
opposed to by COM. The Presidency points out that in case the freedom of expression
prevails over the right to data protection, there will obviously no infringement to sanction.
Where an infringement is found to have place, the interference with the freedom of expression
will have to taken into account as an element in the determination of the sanction. This
application of the proportionality principle should be reﬂected in Chapter VIII.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 255
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 80a

Processing of personal data and public access to ofﬁcial documents @

Personal data in ofﬁcial documents held by a public authority or a public body or a private body for
the performance of a task carried out in the public interest may be disclosed by the authority or
body in accordance with Union law or Member State law to which the public authority or body is
subject in order to reconcile public access to ofﬁcial documents with the right to the protection of

personal data pursuant to this Regulation.

Article 80aa

Processing of personal data and reuse of public sector information

Personal data in public sector information held by a public authority or a public body or a private
body for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest may be disclosed by the
authority or body in accordance with Union law or Member State law to which the public authority
or body is subject in order to reconcile the reuse of such ofﬁcial documents and public sector

information with the right to the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation629.

 

628
629

SK and PT scrutiny reservation.
COM reservation in view of incompatibility with existing EU law, in particular Directive
2003/98/EC (as amended by Directive 2013/37/EU).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 256
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 80b 630

Processing of national identiﬁcation number

Member States may determine the speciﬁc conditions for the processing of a national identiﬁcation
number or any other identiﬁer of general application. In this case the national identiﬁcation number
or any other identiﬁer of general application shall be used only under appropriate safeguards for the

rights and freedoms of the data subject pursuant to this Regulation.

Article 81
Processing of personal data ﬂhealth -related purposes

(. . -)631

Article 81a
Processing of genetic data

(. . -)632

 

630

PL, SK scrutiny reservation.
631

See Article 9(2)(g),(h), (hb) and (4) which enshrine the basic idea, previously expressed in
Article 81, that sensitive data may be processed for purposes of medicine, health-care, public
health and other public interests, subject to certain appropriate safeguards based on Union law
or Member State law. This text is not part of the partial general approach which the Council is
asked to agree at its meeting of 4 December 2014 and will be subject to further scrutiny at
technical level.

See Article 9(2)(ha) and (4) which enshrine the basic idea, previously expressed in Article
81a, that genetic data may be processed, e. g. for medical purposes or to clarify parentage,
subject to certain appropriate safeguards based on Union law or Member State law. This text
is not part of the partial general approach which the Council is asked to agree at its meeting of
4 December 2014 and will be subject to further scrutiny at technical level.

632

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 257
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 82

Processing in the employment context633

1. Member States may by law or by collective agreements. provide for more speciﬁc634 rules to

 

ensure the protection of the rights and freedoms in respect of the processing of employees'
personal data in the employment context, in particular for the purposes of the recruitment, the
performance of the contract of employment, including discharge of obligations laid down by
law or by collective agreements, management, planning and organisation of work, equality

and diversity in the workplace. health and safety at work, protection of employer’s or

 

customer’s proper_ty and for the purposes of the exercise and enjoyment, on an individual or
collective basis, of rights and beneﬁts related to employment, and for the purpose of the

termination of the employment relationship. (. . .)

2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission those provisions of its law which it adopts
pursuant to paragraph 1, by the date speciﬁed in Article 91(2) at the latest and, without delay,

any subsequent amendment affecting them.

I.”J

Member States may by law determine the conditions under which personal data in the

employment context may be processed on the basis of the consent of the employee635,

Article 82a

Processing for purposes of social protection

(...)

 

633
634
635

AT reservation
DE, supported, by AT, CZ, HU, DK and SI, wanted to refer to 'stricter' rules.
This paragraph may need to be looked at again in the context of the discussions on Articles 7
and 8 for consent. COM, PL, PT scrutiny reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 258
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 83

Derogations applying to processing of personal data for archiving purposes in the public interest

I“

LN

|UJ

or for scientiﬁc, statistical and historical purposes

Where personal data are processed for scientiﬁc. statistical636 or historical purposes Union or
Member State law may. subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the
data subject. provide for derogations from Articles 14a( 1) and (2). 15. 16. 17. 17a. 17b. 18

and 19637. insofar as such derogation is necessary for the fulﬁlment of the speciﬁc purposes.

Where personal data are processed for archiving purposes in the public interest. Union or
Member State law may. subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the
data subject. provide for derogations from Articles 14a( 1) and (2). 15. 16. 17. 17a. 17b. 18.
19. 23. 32. 33 and 53 ( 1b)( d) and (e). insofar as such derogation is necessary for the fulﬁlment

638
of these putposes .

In case a type of processing referred to in paragraphs 1 and 1a serves at the same time another

purpose. the derogations allowed for apply only to the processing for the purposes referred to
in those paragraphs.

The appropriate safeguards referred to in paragraphs 1 and 1a shall be laid down in Union or
Member State law and be such to ensure that technological and/or organisational protection
measures pursuant to this Regulation are applied to the personal data (. . .). to minimise the
processing of personal data in pursuance of the proportionality and necessity principles. such
as pseudonymising the data, unless those measures prevent achieving the purpose of the

processing and such purpose cannot be otherwise fulﬁlled within reasonable means.

(...).

 

636
637

638

PL and SI would want to restrict this to statistical processing in the public interest.

NL proposed adding a reference to Article 7. SI supported this as far as scientiﬁc processing
is concerned. PL suggested deleting the reference to Article 19.

COM and AT thought the list of articles from which can be derogated should be more limited.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 259
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 84

Obligations of secrecy 63”

(. . .) Member States may adopt speciﬁc rules to set out the (. . .) powers by the supervisory
authorities laid down in points jda) and (db) of Article 53 (l) in relation to controllers or
processors that are subjects under Union or Member State law or rules established by national
competent bodies to an obligation of professional secrecy, other equivalent obligations of
secrecy or to a code of professional ethics supervised and enforced by professional bodies.
where this is necessary and proportionate to reconcile the right of the protection of personal
data with the obligation of secrecy. These rules shall only apply with regard to personal data
which the controller or processor has received from or has obtained in an activity covered by

this obligation of secrecy.

Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the rules adopted pursuant to paragraph 1,
by the date speciﬁed in Article 91(2) at the latest and, without delay, any subsequent

amendment affecting them.

Article 85

Existing data protection rules of churches and religious associations640

Where in a Member State, churches and religious associations or communities apply, at the
time of entry into force of this Regulation, comprehensive rules relating to the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data, such rules may continue to apply,

provided that they are brought in line with the provisions of this Regulation.

Churches and religious associations which apply comprehensive rules in accordance with
paragraph 1, shall be subject to the control of an independent supervisory authority which
may be speciﬁc. provided that it fulﬁls the conditions laid down in Chapter VI of this

Regulation.

 

639
640

DE and UK scrutiny reservation.
MT, NL, AT and PT reservation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 260
ANNEX DGD2C EN

CHAPTER X
DELEGATED ACTS AND IMPLEMENTING ACTS641

(1) Article 86
Exercise of the delegation

The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the

conditions laid down in this Article.

The delegation of power referred to in (. . .) Article 39aj7) (. . .) shall be conferred on the
Commission for an indeterminate period of time from the date of entry into force of this

Regulation.

The delegation of power referred to in (. . .)Article M) (. . .) may be revoked at any time
by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision of revocation shall put an end to
the delegation of power speciﬁed in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the
publication of the decision in the Oﬂicial Journal of the European Union or at a later date

speciﬁed therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.

As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the

European Parliament and to the Council.

 

641

COM reservation on the deletion of empowerments for delegated acts or implementing acts
including the recitals (129), (130) and (131).

S1: scrutiny reservation.

AT considered that for lack of sufﬁcient legal arrangements in the Regulation itself,
delegated and implementing acts can have a function, where needed in combination with
guidelines of the EDPB.. Therefore, AT can accept the Commission proposal on delegated
acts as regards the Articles 6(5), 8(3), 9(3), 26(5), 39(7), 39(8), 41(3), 41(5) and the EP
suggestions in relation to the Articles 43(4), 43(4) and 79, and the Commission proposal on
implementing acts in relation to Articles 18(3), 26(2b), 31(6), 30(4), 32(6), 38(4), 42(2)
subparagraphs (b) and (c), 43(4), 55(10) and 61(1d).

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 261
ANNEX DGD2C EN

A delegated act adopted pursuant to (. . .)Article M) (. . .) shall enter into force only if
no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a
period of two months of notiﬁcation of that act to the European Parliament and the Council
or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both
informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two

months at the initiative of the European Parliament or the Council.

Article 87

Committee procedure

The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee

within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.

Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall
apply.

Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in
conjunction with Article 5 thereof, shall apply.

 

9788/15
ANNEX

CHS/VH/np 262
DGD2C EN

CHAPTER XI

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 88
Repeal of Directive 95/46/E C

1. Directive 95/46/EC is repealed.

2. 642References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as references to this Regulation.
References to the Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the
Processing of Personal Data established by Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC shall be
construed as references to the European Data Protection Board established by this

Regulation.

 

642 UK: reservation. UK considers that the current drafting does not work for the purposes it is

intended to achieve. Propose to redraft article : “References to particular parts or provisions
in the repealed Directive are to be construed as references to the equivalent provisions in the
Regulation [. ..].”

IT: scrutiny reservation

IE pointed to the practical problems of repeal of Directive 95/46/EC and replacement by the
new GDPR. DE, CZ and NL queried whether a list existed of legislative acts that would be
affected by such replacement. Cion indicated that a transitional period of 2 years is foreseen.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 263
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 89643 644

Relationship to (. . .) Directive 2002/58/EC645

This Regulation shall not impose additional obligations on natural or legal persons in
relation to the processing of personal data in connection with the provision of publicly
available electronic communications services in public communication networks in the
Union in relation to matters for which they are subject to speciﬁc obligations with the

same objective set out in Directive 2002/ 5 8/EC.64"

 

643

644

645

646

FI suggested to insert a related recital: "In relation to this Regulation, the information
security measures that are meant to protect the transmission and conﬁdentiality of
communications can be regulated nationally under the Article 4 and 5 of the Directive
2002/ 5 8/EC and under the Article 13a of the framework Directive 2002/21/EC."

CZ, DK, IE, IT, FI, NL, UK wanted to keep 89 with deletion of para 2 (as in the text now).
BG expressed preference for deleting art 89 but could be ﬂexible.

FR, NL scrutiny reservation, inter alia s regards the phrase "the same obj ective". FR did not
necessarily want to delete para 2.

PL, SI: scrutiny reservation.

DE requested clariﬁcation of Cion why article 89 was proposed.

AT wanted to delete art 89 so that Directive 2002/5 8/EC would be covered by art 88.

AT, BE, FR, IT: scrutiny reservation concerning the consistent application of the e-Privacy
Directive and the GDPR. In reaction, Cion indicated that the e-Privacy Directive
complements Directive 95/46/EC. The e-Privacy Directive will need to be adapted after
adoption of the GDPR.

FR queried why only a reference was made to the e-Privacy Directive and not also to ﬁ the
e-commerce Directive.

AT, supported by HU and HR, suggested to add: "When in doubt, this Regulation is
applicable and not Directive 2002/5 8/EC when more beneﬁcial for the data subject."

FR was dissatisﬁed with the drafting of this Article and meant that it would be unclear for
the controller what rules that would be applicable to him/her (how could they know about
the objective of a certain provision), this Regulation or the e-privacy Directive. NL
supported FR that a clariﬁcation was necessary. BE scrutiny reservation on the links
between this Regulation and the e-privacy Directive.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 264
ANNEX DGD2C EN

Article 89a

Relationship to previously concluded Agreements

International agreements involving the transfer of personal data to third countries or international
organisations which were concluded by Member States prior to the entry into force of this
Regulation, and which are in compliance with Directive 95/46/EC, shall remain in force until

amended, replaced or revoked647.

Article 90

Evaluation

I“

The Commission shall submit reports on the evaluation and review of this Regulation to

the European Parliament and the Council at regular intervals.648.

In the context of these evaluations the Commission shall examine. in particular. the

LN

application and functioning of the provisions of Chapter VII on Co-operation and

Consistency.

I.“

The ﬁrst report shall be submitted no later than four years after the entry into force of this
Regulation. Subsequent reports shall be submitted every four years thereafter. The reports

shall be made public.

 

647 Cion reservation based on strong legal doubts on the legality of such proposal. Cion refers to

recital (79).

AT, HU: reservation and IT, PL, R0 and UK scrutiny reservation considering that all
relevant international agreements need to be checked if they are in compliance and they can
only be adapted in cooperation with the third country contracting parties.

DE, supported by F1, wanted to specify other aspects that in particular needed to be
evaluated.DE suggested to add: - the functioning of the provisions of chapter 111 and their
effects in practice on the data subjects and controllers; and

- the functionality of the provisions of this Regulation with regard to new technological
developments.

UK, supported by Cion, wanted the phrase on OSS to be in a separate paragraph.

PL: scrutiny reservation wanting the EDPB to be involved in the evaluation.

648

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 265
ANNEX DGD2C EN

l.-h

The Commission shall, if necessary, submit appropriate proposals with a view to amending
this Regulation, and aligning other legal instruments, in particular taking account of
developments in information technology and in the light of the state of progress in the

information society.

Article 91
Entry into force and application

This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication

in the Oﬁ‘icial Journal of the European Union.

It shall apply from [two years from the date referred to in paragraph 1]649.

This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Brussels,

For the European Parliament For the Council

The President The President

 

 

649

CZ, DE, FR scrutiny reservation about the moment of applicability of the regulation on data
individual processing operations so as to provide legal certainty and avoid bureaucracy.

CZ, FI, HU, SE wanted a longer transitional period for the Regulation to become applicable
than the foreseen 2 years. DE referred to Article 41(3 a) on adequacy decisions that would
remain valid until amended etc. and meant that this should also apply to decisions made by
national authorities based on such decisions. DE noted that in three places (also Articles
42(5)(b) and 89a)) in the GDPR sunset clauses were inserted but not here. In the same vein
FR raised concerns for the processing itself and found it exaggerated that such processing
would be invalid only because they did not comply with the GDPR. NL and CZ supported
DE and FR and NL asked for speciﬁc provisions for this to create legal certainty. Cion
replied to DE and FR that the objective of the GDPR was a reform of the existing data
protection rules: this implied that the standards and rules of the GDPR must be followed
from the day of its application. Cion opposed a general sunset clause and recalled that,
where appropriate, a speciﬁc clause ensuring continuity was foreseen in Article 41(3 a) and
42(5)(b)-

Furthermore Cion stressed that a 2 years' transitional period is special for applicability of a
regulation.

 

9788/15 CHS/VH/np 266
ANNEX DGD2C EN

